###### [Home](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/blob/master/README.md) | [Agile](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/tree/master/Agile/README.md) |
------------


Agile : Fails 
=============


Executive Leadership
====================

<kbd>![Revolving hat with eyeglass, etc.](https://scrumorg-website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/drupal/inline-images/Living_made_easy%3B_revolving_hat_with_eye-glass_etc._Wellcome_L0006016_0.jpg) </kbd>

> "Most executives, many scientists, and almost all business school
> graduates believe that if you analyze data, this will give you new
> ideas. Unfortunately, this belief is totally wrong. The mind can only
> see what it is prepared to see." - Edward de Bono

If you are ever hired as an agile coach, it\'s quite likely that the
importance of the engagement will be impressed upon you from the outset.
That\'s certainly been my experience anyway. I\'ve never yet been
recruited for a gig which was described to me as being trivial. Why is
this the case though? Are chief executives looking at their charts and
numbers and saying  *\"there\'s only one thing for it, we\'ll have to
bring Ian Mitchell in\"*? Am I a high-rolling celebrity coach who only
gets top-level contracts? It would be nice to imagine so. However my
accountant at least, I am sure, has reason to suspect that this might
not be true.

Rather, it\'s much more likely that when an organization is stressed,
the pressures end up being applied to an external locus - namely the
coach being hired to provide remedy. As a new and perhaps unknown
quantity, all sorts of characteristics can be imagined onto a coach\'s
blank dial before he or she arrives. Some may see you as a force to be
channelled and directed against their cankered enemies, given that a
powerful and mysterious magic will be heralded by your dawn. Get a good
agile coach on board, it is often assumed, and new wonders will begin.
Things will become faster and cheaper. The agile coach will bring change
and make others see reason. Just watch!

Of course things don\'t quite pan out that way. Unless you have your own
issues, you'll recognize that no transformative magic can ever be
radiated by your mere presence. You\'ll know that people have to 
*want* change, to realize that it affects  *them*, and that sponsorship
for engagement with a coach must be communicated and reinforced from the
very top. Unfortunately, this can also present a significant problem.
The difficulties may become apparent in the first meeting you have on a
client site. To understand why, let\'s review the direction an initial 
*rencontre avec eux* might actually take.

"I hope you realize just how important this agile coaching initiative
really is\", you are informed with gravitas. \"There\'s a lot riding on
it. It\'s big, urgent, and critical to the future of the company."

"Fine\", you reply. \"Let\'s get a meeting with the CEO into the diary.
That's who'll have to sponsor the deep and pervasive organizational
change which will be required."

"Ah\...um\...well\..."

You see, what often happens is that the supposed scale, importance and
urgency of the challenge is passed onto the coach. The agile
transformation initiative is handled like any other - through
delegation. What isn\'t realized is that there\'s precious little an
agile coach can do with exhortations such as this, no matter how gravely
they are intoned. The coach does not have a hand-cranked transformation
machine which can be turned any harder or faster. The constraints which
inhibit change are much more likely to be found within the organization
itself and across its serried departments, cultural assumptions, and
established practices. That\'s why a good coach will value executive
sponsorship and be keen to secure it. Anything less is likely to result
in drift and delay, and the exposing of impediments which will stagnate
unresolved. There may be local optimizations to scrabble for which can
be worthwhile, and a window of transparency over critical issues and
dependencies can certainly be put in place. At a strategic level though,
the gains will be poor and it is unlikely that the high expectations
will be met.

The simple fact is that responsibility for enterprise change cannot be
delegated away to subordinates and hirelings. Senior executives are
accountable for what happens, and they must be careful and keen to
engage with any party who would help revise the model through which the
organization delivers value. Yet so often they are conspicuous only by
their absence, and by an unmet need for clear executive authority which
only they can provide. It is their middle managers, and not coaches, who
are served and who presently make decisions on what the disempowered
should do. Ironically, these can be the people whose interests are most
likely to be vested in the status quo. They\'ve been there for years and
know how to work the system and exploit its foibles. If a coach tries to
make a connection with the senior higher-ups in order to explain and
resolve an organizational impediment, mid-tier managers are likely to
intervene and put a stop to the attempt or otherwise contain it. The
organization's officers act so that control of access-to-power is
reasserted through the hierarchy. At times, hunting down a true
executive sponsor for a supposed agile transformation can seem like an
episode of the X-Files. As soon as a coach gets close to what might be
the truth, the Men In Black appear, complete with smart suits, a
threatening robotic manner, and dire warnings of how important it is to
back off and take things no further.

The risks presented by weak executive sponsorship are great. A company
does not typically stop in order to transform, and enterprise change
must happen while an organization is in flight. Ultimately it is senior
managers, and not the coach, who will be accountable for the success of
the endeavor. So now let\'s examine some of the more common failure
modes which executives demonstrate when abdicating their agile
leadership responsibilities.

Fail \#1. Not recognizing the immediate significance of organizational culture 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

These days pretty much every chief executive talks about becoming agile.
For the most part, they would genuinely like to think of themselves and
their people as being able to work in this way. However, the executive
view of their organization is cast through the lens of their immediate
reports, filters, and barriers to access. This is the domain where the
\"frozen middle\" hold sway. Any assessment of cultural impediments to
agile practice will therefore pass through and be shaped by the system
itself. The information they receive about the organization will be
inherently self-referential and objectively blurred and distorted. Yet
through this intelligence executives hope to redefine value streams and
portfolios and roles, and to discern a strategic agile policy. They wish
for a telescope to see further and are handed a milk bottle to look at
the moon.

Nevertheless, the failure belongs with them. Everyone must recognize the
significance of  *culture* in defining what is seen now and the way it
is seen. Agile transformation is indeed deep and pervasive, and
understanding that it somehow \"involves\" cultural change is not
enough. It\'s also essential to realize that the information you
receive, and the way you receive it, may no longer be fit for purpose.
Hence the way executives personally interact with their organization
must change too.

Fail \#2. Thinking that agile change is technical
-------------------------------------------------

We\'ve all seen it: the roll-your-own \"agile\" model which draws a loop
around the development stage in a waterfall process. We cannot feign
surprise. Software, being inherently plastic, is the point of least
resistance when it comes to organizational change. It\'s also where
value is most clearly added to any products or services being built.
Other enterprise processes and artifacts are further removed from the
empiricism provided by demonstrable working code. These other parts of
the value stream often move glacially, and are abstracted away into more
rarefied administrative layers. Yet all of those requirements sets,
design specifications, sign-offs and promissory notes effectively define
the established way-of-working. They are consequently much harder to
challenge, and harder again to genuinely change.

This can easily mislead stakeholders, including senior executives, into
thinking that agile transformation is essentially a technical concern.
The result of this bias will be weak pull for any deliverables which
those \"agile development teams\" are expected to create. Also, any
dependencies they may have upon other organizational elements, such as
other teams, architectural authorities or change control boards, will
remain unresolved. There may be local optimizations and improved
transparency over old problems, but any significant change to the way
business is actually conducted cannot be expected to happen. It\'s
incumbent upon senior executives to realize that if the benefits of
agile change are indeed to accrue, then change must be demanded from -
and sponsored across - the whole enterprise.

Fail \#3. Trying to delegate responsibility for change
------------------------------------------------------

Most organizations, especially large ones, are hierarchical. The way in
which value and decisions flow across the enterprise is shaped by this
structure. Broad decisions are made at the top. The details are left to
middle-management layers to sort out, oversee, and implement. Progress
will be gauged not through empirical evidence, but through the reports
and pro-forma mechanisms expected by those delegates, and which transfer
accumulated risk from one party to another.

This can lead executives into assuming a hands-off posture when seeking
enterprise change. A decision may be made to \"go agile\", and perhaps
to even adopt a particular framework, but the execution of the plan will
be delegated. This posture may be reinforced by the specious argument
that employees ought to be self-organizing in this new agile world. The
duplicity of this logic is quite clear - the people can\'t self-organize
because the culture for doing so hasn\'t arisen yet. Moreover, by
delegating risk through and across a hierarchy, empirical control of the
change process will be lost. How can an executive know that a plan is
correct, and correctly understood, and correctly acted upon? People may
see a need for change, and genuinely want it, but they rarely want 
*to* change. The responsibility for implementing a transformation is
then delegated ever-further downward. It must happen elsewhere.
Eventually it may land at the feet of an agile coach\...someone whom few
can spare time for, but from whom great results are expected. Again,
this is a top-level executive failure. Everyone must be involved in
enterprise transformation, and the responsibility for managing its
success cannot be passed on to someone else.

Fail \#4. Not appreciating the effect of organizational gravity 
---------------------------------------------------------------

Organizational gravity can be defined as the tendency of people to
revert to traditional ways-of-working. This is often the case in an
agile transformation initiative where traction is not gained. Employees
may observe old procedures and protocols while emulating new agile
practices as well. It can be seen as the state of  *doing* agile
without  *being* agile. When a coach eventually leaves, not even
lip-service to the new system might be paid any more. Organizational
gravity can also cause people to behave defensively when faced with the
expectation of genuine change on their turf. A company\'s \"frozen
middle\" management layer can see it as their duty to stop a dangerous
revolution from happening, while mollifying senior executives with
carefully engineered optics that suggest change is indeed underway. The
organizational antibodies can be expected to kick in when the status-quo
is threatened. There can be a great reluctance to see existing roles
undergo metamorphosis, or even just to hold previous reporting
structures in abeyance.

Senior managers must understand the withering effect of organizational
gravity, which tugs and tears at a transformation attempt until
everything becomes molded to the organization\'s current shape. They
must be particularly wary of agile vocabulary being co-opted, where new
words are merely used to describe unchanged roles, artifacts, or events.
They must be equally wary of that new vocabulary being modified to fit
in with an organization\'s existing values and prejudices. The result
would be a debasement of agile practice and a loss of inertia for
achieving the new ways-of-working that are expected. Executives owe it
to themselves and their company to be properly informed about the
difficulty of change, and what the words describing change really mean.

Fail \#5. Not sponsoring change robustly
----------------------------------------

Not all senior executives are bluff and headstrong captains of industry.
Some are weak and easily blown by the prevailing winds, or are too
detached from the enterprise and its work to be truly bothered about a
change initiative. They may have given the nod to an agile
transformation attempt when pressured by certain factions, but they will
leave any handling to their direct reports to sort out. This is
different to and worse than delegation, since the expectation of a
managed and co-ordinated result isn\'t even there.

The consequence of weak executive sponsorship is a piecemeal approach to
change. Some change may occur in isolated pockets for brief periods, but
the critical mass for enterprise transformation will never be gained.
The strength of agile sponsorship is a critically important factor in
overcoming the organisational gravity which holds change back.

Fail \#6. Not communicating the requisite sense of urgency
----------------------------------------------------------

John Kotter\'s \"8-Step Process to Leading Change\" ought to be
instrumental in guiding executives through a transformation attempt.
Usually however it is not. Even the very first step - creating a sense
of urgency for change - is rarely followed through in practice.

A well-communicated sense of urgency is arguably the purest expression
of good agile sponsorship. Imagine the possibilities were it to be
asserted at board-level that not only must change happen, it must happen
now. Conversely a failure to transmit this imperative across the
enterprise, and to set expectations accordingly, will stop critical
momentum from building up. Change will be put off or delegated until the
scale and immediacy of the challenge recedes from view or can be
deposited at a new coach\'s feet. Senior managers must take care to
ensure that agile transformation is given top priority, and that
adopting and improving agile practice is not an afterthought but instead
must anchor everyone\'s working day.

Fail \#7. Executing an agile change initiative as if it were just another program 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The  *modus operandi* of an enterprise defines not only the way in which
it delivers value, but its very method for implementing change. The
processes it follows describe how change is allowed to happen, whether
it be the construction of a new product to be added to a portfolio, or a
new system to replace an old one through which institutional data is
manipulated and retained. The processes themselves are generally assumed
to be immutable until they are challenged by transformative agile
thinking. They can appear to be the only conceivable way of doing
things\...an inherited bias which corrupts the art of the possible. Its
strictures can even masquerade within the organization as common sense.

The ramifications of a transformation attempt are clouded by this
thinking, which lingers as a sort of original sin. It pollutes
rationalization and militates against an objective understanding of its
forces. Senior executives, following established doctrine, may therefore
try to delegate an agile transformation initiative as if it were just
another program of work. It will be budgeted for in the traditional
manner, given a standard mandate, and its success measured using
old-style metrics in an old-time way. In effect the agile coach is
transmogrified into a known quantity whose remit is already
circumscribed by establishment orthodoxy: a program manager. The ability
to apply empiricism, and therefore to prove value, will also be lost.
Obviously the success of a change attempt will be severely impacted by
this, and most likely from the very beginning. Executives must
appreciate that an agile transformation will fundamentally change the
organization itself. The whole enterprise is likely to be affected even
if  *one* team is to succeed, and hence the initiative cannot be subject
to established program constraints.

Fail \#8. Trying to ride an agile change initiative on the back of another program 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A further degeneration of the spirit of change is regrettably common.
Instead of being framed as a true enterprise initiative, it might be
applied as a salve to another program of work, and perhaps one which
would otherwise be dismissed as being hopelessly over-ambitious.
Examples of this are the so-called \"digital transformation\" schemes
which have become fashionable across government and the larger
corporates. The scope of such a scheme can be one of large-scale
migration and technical uplift, often with a view towards abandoning
troubled legacy estate and a necropolis of technical debt. However, any
\"agile\" part of the initiative is rarely thought through. A mystery
to those concerned, agility is conjectured to be the secret sauce which
will align time, scope, and budget.

The immediate consequence of this toxic exercise is to constrain
sponsorship for change to the program concerned. Where teams have
organizational dependencies outside of the host program, such as upon
shared corporate resources or authorities, those impediments are not
likely to be resolved. The remit for change will not extend into those
areas, and there may be no obligation felt there to help agile teams
meet their delivery responsibilities. Any work done will then fall short
of the standard needed for it to be considered finished. The Definition
of Done will soon be outweighed by the deficit for release once
development starts. Work will be batched up, incomplete, until those who
lie outside the program are in a position to deal with it.

Senior managers should recognize the danger of constraining agile change
in such a way, and the folly of expecting program directors to provide
organizational sponsorship beyond their narrow remit. No matter how sure
it seems that all necessary resources lie under program control, as soon
as a team starts sprinting unforeseen impediments and dependencies will
surely emerge. Agile change is deep, pervasive, and must be expected to
transcend all existing work and associated programs. There\'s nothing
wrong in selecting a pilot scheme, but sponsorship for agile practice
must reach beyond the narrow horizons which currently limit thought and
action. It can only really come from the very top.

Fail \#9. Trying to hire "method installers" 
--------------------------------------------

I remember being on a large agile transformation attempt at a London
bank, where I was one of many coaches. The bank insisted on having clear
transformation backlogs in place for each would-be agile team, of which
there were well over a hundred. Planning sessions, reviews,
retrospectives, usage of artifacts, presence of roles and so on were
enumerated in some detail.

Make no mistake about it, transformation backlogs can be a very useful
thing. They can and should establish transparency over progress, so it
can be inspected and adapted and correlated to improved value.
Unfortunately that\'s where the client\'s approach fell short. Change
wasn\'t empirically measurable, it was something to be \"coached out\"
to existing workgroups. Those groups had neither the authority to
self-organize as proper agile teams, nor the time nor the remit to assay
deep structural change. A coach had to work agile improvements into and
around these busy people with their various silos, competing demands,
and ongoing commitments within an otherwise stage-gated institution.
There was no correlation between anything on a transformation backlog
and any value which might be delivered in a timely way. The feedback
loop was not likely to be closed for nearly two years. Worse, there were
notional targets for attaining levels of supposed agile maturity during
that dark period. Yet if there is no empirical evidence of improvement,
how can maturity or progress be gauged at all? The bank thought they had
their answer: they would conduct their agile transformation by
checklist. If a coach, through some mystical means of divination,
figured that a change had been coached satisfactorily then it was
checked off. There were burn-downs showing how splendidly everything was
going as each transformation backlog was whittled away.

You see, in reality we were not engaged as agile coaches at all. Rather,
the bank had set us up as \"method installers\", and in so doing they
had set their transformation up to fail. No business can hope to reduce
a profound change in its culture to a check-box exercise. Amongst other
things the validated learning loop must certainly be closed frequently,
if an assessment of progress is to be grounded in anything other than
fiction. The temptation to do otherwise can be considerable, since
establishing empirical control within large organizations is hard. The
path of least resistance can appear to be to set up false controls, with
metrics and measures that are poorly vested in empiricism, but rich in
convincing detail. Any assurances received will be fake. Senior
executives must take care to ensure that an agile change initiative,
including any work enumerated on transformation backlogs, is rooted in
the empiricism agile practice brings to bear.

Fail \#10. "Mapping" instead of changing
----------------------------------------

About twenty years ago, before agile practice had even become
fashionable, other means of iterative-incremental delivery were
nevertheless in the ascendant. I remember many companies spawning their
own versions of the \"Unified Process\" and how I assisted in some truly
monstrous births. It was thought that change could be eased into a
hide-bound organization by \"mapping\" its stage-gated process onto a
new iterative and incremental model. Improvements in the flow of value
would be catalyzed by this exercise\...or so it was hoped. In practice
change very rarely happened at all. It never seemed to develop beyond
the boxes, lines, and other squiggles which constituted the relevant
process map.

The underlying issue is one which organizations still face
today\...people  *want* change, but they don\'t want  *to* change. The
head of steam for improvement might build up no further than the
creation of that theoretical mapping between an idealized agile state
and the current reality. Institutional apathy can be especially irksome
when a bimodal IT strategy is propagated. The ability to \"drop out\" of
agile practice can be seized on, not when it makes best sense for value
delivery, but when agile change simply proves too hard.  *Plus ça
change, plus c\'est la même chose*.

Senior executives must therefore be genuine in their desire to bring
about agile change. No benefits can possibly accrue from a paper-based
exercise in which an agile \"mapping\" is thought to hold transformative
power.

Fail \#11. Trying to change agile practice instead of changing the organization 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

When an agile transformation initiative is announced in a company,
employees can see a need to either reconcile or choose between two quite
opposing forces. In the one corner we have lean-agile practice and its
flyweight techniques for value delivery. In the other we have the
super-heavyweight enterprise and its established way of doing things. It
hardly seems a fair match to begin with. Moreover the existing system
already applies to the organization in its own context. In comparison,
an agile coach only seems to offer generalizations about certain
practices which have been applied elsewhere. Who will listen to a
dreamer like that in the ring? \"Things are different here\", it is very
often claimed. \"Vanilla agile won\'t work!\" There is a perceived
credibility gap to be bridged. Anything from introducing Sprint Goals to
having a release-quality Definition of Done might be dismissed as being
\"too vanilla\" or \"too generic\", if it doesn\'t quite square with the
current set-up. The agile coach is at a clear disadvantage when the old
guard of middle managers exercise a right of veto. If anything must
change, they are likely to say, then it must be the agile practices you
have in mind. An industrious coach is expected to provide something
which has been \"customized\" or \"configured\" to align with the
existing deal. The arc of the agile transformation is brought down by
organizational gravity. \"Bring us an agile way-of-working that matches
what we already do\", is the obvious yet unspoken implication. Anything
less than that is seen as a failure to be practical. For many coaches it
is tempting to acquiesce, collect the money, and live a quiet life until
the rubes get wise about the scam they\'ve bought into and it\'s time to
move on.

Every executive must therefore understand and accept that \"agile
transformation\" means changing the organization, and not changing agile
practice. That is after all the purpose of the exercise if any benefits
from change are to accrue. They must also be aware that a lucrative
industry has emerged to satisfy the popular demand for half-baked
transformation attempts which do not yield a satisfactory outcome.

Fail \#12. Misunderstanding value and flow 
------------------------------------------

Senior managers tend to think of agility in terms of executing projects
more quickly and more cheaply. That\'s the secret sauce they often hope
for. In truth though, agile practice is really about gaining empirical
process control in a complex and uncertain environment. Those iterative
and incremental techniques are geared towards experimentation, and at
times the achievement of profit can seem almost incidental to that
concern. Agile practice helps an organization to learn about the
business context in which it truly operates. Agility isn\'t about
running projects faster and cheaper. It\'s about learning to build the
right thing at the right time.

Executives can be suckered into assuming a \"faster-and-cheaper\"
prescript because they misunderstand the significance of value and flow.
They may suspect both are important in achieving lean efficiencies.
However, they might easily ignore the importance of visualizing the flow
of value so business operations can be better understood. Most
critically, they can fail to challenge the received wisdom of what
\"value\" amounts to in the first place. Ask a manager what \"value\"
is, and there\'s a good chance that \"doing projects faster and
cheaper\" will be the depth of their reasoning. Middle managers, under
pressure to complete projects under constraints of time and budget, are
most likely to be nonplussed by a pursued line of inquiry. \"Of course
projects must be done faster and cheaper\", they will think. \"That\'s
always the pain-point. What more to value can there be?\"

Senior executives must be aware of how this thinking shapes
organizational culture. They should be very careful to avoid framing
agile discussions in \"faster and cheaper\" terms lest this mislead
others or confirm their prejudices. Rather, they should clearly
highlight the need for validated learning, the pull for small and
incremental experiments, transparency over queue and batch sizes, value
prioritization techniques, and team self-organization around clearly
defined workflows.

Fail \#13. Not thinking about what \"Done\" means 
-------------------------------------------------

The degree to which a product is complete, and fit for purpose, is a
common source of misunderstanding between stakeholders. For example if a
product increment has been developed - but not tested under user
conditions - then those working in an engineering department might still
think of the fruits of their labor as being \"complete\". For them at
least, it is finished. An end customer however might have different
ideas. They could reasonably expect that user testing has indeed been
carried out. They might additionally expect that documentation is in
place and that training courses are available along with product
support. So when is work truly finished?

Clearly there are implications here for quality control and for business
reputation. Imagine what would happen if cars trundled off an assembly
line without seat upholstery or headlight bulbs in place. In truth
though, manufacturing industries generally have a robust understanding
of what \"done\" means for their outputs to be production-ready. The IT
industry is perhaps not so mature or circumspect in defining and
assuring its quality standards. A \"Definition of Done\" therefore ought
to be of critical importance to senior executives, because they
ultimately carry the can for corporate risk and reputation. They need to
be sure that the definition being subscribed to by development teams is
appropriate for enterprise purposes and that it would not put the
business in jeopardy. Managers should realize that the most effective
way to check work for compliance is to use skilled inspectors at the
time and place of work being carried out, and not as a separate stage or
phase. Frequent and timely inspection stops waste from accumulating and
reduces any rework needed. Automated checks reduce the time spent on
inspection and the chances of error.

This also means ensuring that teams do in fact have all of the skills
needed to create a truly \"Done\" increment, including all testing,
documentation, and handover or support capabilities which might be
needed. Being able to provide increments of work that are demonstrably
complete, early and often, is instrumental in assuring transparency over
progress, controlling risk, and minimizing the accrual of technical
debt. Senior executive sponsorship may be required if any dependencies
upon external resources, skills, or authorizations are to be eliminated
and brought within a team.

Fail \#14. Not reconsidering metrics 
------------------------------------

In traditional organizations, managers often depend upon reports to give
them an idea of what is going on and the decisions they ought to make.
Charts and numbers provide them with essential information, and they
interpret these sources using the indicators and measurements they think
best reveal the underlying truth. Their view of the world is filtered
and shaped by such metrics.

Unfortunately however, even transformational progress will often be
gauged using these existing indicators. The time left until the supposed
completion of the initiative can be thought most important for example,
instead of the value which is being delivered now, and what might be
learned from it. Executives should realize that the way success is
measured is also something that has to change. More appropriate and
empirical means of assessment can include a focus on innovation
accounting and the elicitation of actionable rather than vanity metrics.
Even measures of employee performance could have to be revised, so that
better teamwork might be rewarded. Whatever techniques are chosen,
executives need to accept that agile transformation cannot be sponsored
or assured using old anachronistic measures and terms of reference.

Fail \#15. Not applying empirical process control to enterprise change
----------------------------------------------------------------------

It would be foolish to try and conduct an agile transformation as if it
were just another program of work. However, it would be equally foolish
not to set about change in a managed way. Unfortunately though, a lack
of control is apparent in many agile transformation attempts. Empiricism
is typically lacking. Instead, a mixed slush of agile techniques will be
thrown against the wall, in the hope that some of it might stick. It\'s
a recipe for people to become adept at \"doing\" agile rather than
\"being\" agile. They\'ll go through at least some of the forms and
motions, for a while, but the empirical evidence provided by agile
delivery is unlikely to be forthcoming. Organizational gravity is more
likely to assert itself, and to bend change to the institution\'s
current will and shape.

Empirical process control is inherent to any true agile way-of-working
and that must include a transformation attempt. Hence senior executives
must look for empirical evidence of improvement, and not reports or
other promissory notes, to be assured that an agile change initiative is
indeed \"on course\". For example, they might reasonably expect
transformational effort to be visualized and managed as one or more
change backlogs. Each should capture the good agile practices which are
expected to \"move the needle\" and help achieve empirical improvement
in team-based value delivery. At least one transformation group may be
needed who can interpret the effect of agile coaching in this way, and
inspect and adapt those transformation backlogs, until agile practice is
normed across the enterprise and self-organizing teams are in place.

Managing a cultural shift of this nature is not something which can be
delegated. There will be many things that need doing, and which will
transcend any one program of work. They are likely to cut across the
whole organizational structure. Even getting  *just one* team to
successfully deliver a release-quality increment after  *just
one* iteration can require deep and pervasive change across the
enterprise. There will be many unforeseen dependencies which will have
to be recognized, challenged and removed. New agile teams will have to
be brought together with the ability to self-organize. There will be new
value streams to be identified and old ones which will need to be
improved. Teams will have to acquire new skills, to learn based on
evidence, to sort out their dependencies with others, and to identify
and remove waste.

If you were to get to the heart of what enterprise agility really means,
you could say that it demonstrates the empirical mastery of innovation
at scale. Since most organizations are conservative rather than
innovative, executives must recognize the barriers which are likely to
be presented to any associated agile change attempt. The organization is
likely to harbor some quite reactionary forces, including
middle-managers who genuinely believe that resisting change, and
preserving established and \"proven\" norms, is the right thing to do.
Very often, empiricism is something only resorted to in an emergency,
and abandoned when the danger recedes. Senior executives must sponsor
transformation across all of the parts of an enterprise, and advocate
the empirical process control which  *always* underpins agile practice.

Fail \#16. Not encouraging a product focus 
------------------------------------------

Pick a large organization, any one. Go to the head office and take a
good look. What business are they in?

Well, chances are you could be forgiven for thinking they\'re in the
business of running projects. That\'s the main thrust of what they might
seem to be doing anyhow\...irrespective of whatever products or services
they might provide or the industry sector they are in. They are likely
to be drafting project initialization documents, seeking and approving
mandates, scoping requirements sets, establishing project plans at
various levels of detail, concocting RAID logs and RACI matrices,
leveling resources, securing funding and putting together work packages.
Everywhere, documents are passed around which are promissory notes for
some value as yet unevidenced and undelivered. In a perverse expression
of managerial self-aggrandizement, these documents may even be referred
to as \"products\". Risk is transferred from one party to another until
judgment day when the actual product is scheduled to materialize.

Projects are by definition temporary endeavors. Much effort is expended
in setting them up, monitoring their supposed progress in the absence of
regular useful deliverables, and in tearing them down afterwards. They
are known to be a poor vehicle for sustaining the flow of value, and for
retaining the institutional knowledge and team skills which allow value
to be optimized.

Encouraging executives to rethink the enterprise not in terms of
projects, but rather in terms of the genuine products which allow value
to be released and empirical lessons to be learned, has proven to be a
long and slow battle. Then again, developing a product focus might be
criticized on the grounds that it doesn\'t necessarily emphasize value
and flow. We could still have products which are ill-conceived and
poorly represented in terms of ownership, and perhaps end up with
limited visibility over services. Nevertheless, establishing a
product-focused organization is undoubtedly a step forward to
understanding value streams of any type, and it is a significant
improvement on project-execution mode. Senior executives should
therefore take care to ensure that products rather than \"projects\" are
being sustained, and that they are clearly owned and represented at all
levels.

Fail \#17. Not rethinking roles 
-------------------------------

Agile change is determined not just by the work that people do, but by
how they begin to see themselves in relation to it. Any of an
organization\'s present roles, perhaps even all of them, could need to
change if value delivery is to be maximized. Senior executives
themselves may need to rethink how they fit in to an enterprise value
stream, and the value they should be adding. Is it really appropriate to
expect \"reports\" from others, given that this can subject essential
data to filtering and delay? How about building transparency, and even
more importantly, making use of it? Furthermore, shouldn\'t
responsibility for inspection and adaptation be devolved upon those who
actually perform the work? Establishing transparency over the various
things that are done, and the way people go about them, is essential to
agile development.

In Scrum there are a mere three roles and Scaled Professional Scrum adds
to this just one more. They are optimized to deliver work of release
quality at least once every month. In comparison to this, large
organizations can have scores or even hundreds of job descriptions. Each
of them will be geared towards the scheduling of work according to the
availability of the associated \"resource\", such as analysts and
designers, programmers and testers. Work will be passed from one person,
or pseudo-team with similarly constrained skills, to another.

Executives must understand that in agile practice work is not scheduled
by resource availability, or by the passing of work between silos and
through stage gates. Instead, people ought to go to where the work is,
so that a so-called \"resource\" and the role they fill becomes
orthogonal to the workflow. That\'s the intent behind a self-organizing
team, and the teamwork they should exhibit. People should be able to
organize themselves around the work that needs doing, when it needs
doing, and ensure that it is done to a satisfactory level of quality.

Fail \#18. Overlooking the strategic, operational or tactical aspects of change 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

I\'ve often found that when I\'m hired as an agile coach, little thought
is given to the type of coaching I will need to do, or how it is likely
to impact the organization and its stakeholders. Sometimes it\'s just
assumed that I will ensure an initiative is somehow accomplished
\"faster and cheaper\". The classic error of executing agile change as a
project or program, or on the back of another one, is rarely far away.
More remote unfortunately is any consideration of empirical process
control or of what it means to have a learning organization. The agile
coach is simply thought of as another manager, albeit one who brings
that "agile secret sauce\"\...the magic ingredient of project success.
What executives fail to realize is that agile coaching impacts the whole
organization, and hence it must be considered at tactical, operational,
and strategic levels.

*Tactical coaching* is most often team-facing and innately
unpredictable. There are always retrospectives or other events which
need facilitating, or during which a Scrum Master could need to be
mentored. There might be on-the-spot advice which is asked for or which
ought to be given, estimation or other agile techniques which must be
taught, and outreach sessions to other parts of the enterprise which
need to be arranged. Tactical coaching is usually ad-hoc, and isn\'t
something that an agile coach ever really escapes from, or should wish
to. It\'s about helping people to understand and master agile practice
in the field.

*Operational coaching* is comparatively focused, and aligned towards the
specific agile roles people need to fulfil. Product Owners, Scrum
Masters, and Development Team members can need formal or semi-formal
training so they at least broadly understand the part they have to play,
and the collaborative relationship they will need to have with others.
Scrum courses which articulate to some type of accreditation can provide
a certain degree of grounding. Also, there are people in existing roles,
such as business analysts, testers, or project managers, who can feel
uncertain or threatened by the prospect of what agile change will mean
for them. Sometimes workshops can help people to move into new roles for
which they are qualified. Business analysts, for example, may benefit
from group sessions in which user story writing or backlog refinement
are explained. In short, people may need to be coached to perform their
agile roles at an operational level.

*Strategic coaching* is aimed at executives. The assistance given can be
structured or unstructured, depending upon when it occurs in the
engagement and which management functions are addressed. There might be
a formal workshop or training course to begin with during which
essential terms of reference are established. Later on, there might be
more tightly-focused sessions during which many questions will need to
be answered and risks clearly highlighted. Some of the issues and
pitfalls covered here might be explored, for example. It\'s also vitally
important to ensure that a strategic vision for enterprise agile
transformation is elicited, and that adequate sponsorship for it is in
place.

Fail \#19. Thinking they're above it all
----------------------------------------

Sponsorship for agile change, unfortunately, very often proves to be the
Achilles\' heel of a transformation scheme. Part of the problem lies in
a delegation culture and in assuming that the challenge is essentially a
technical one. From this executives can compound their error by failing
to consider the agile coach as an enterprise change agent who is
deserving of their time. Rather, the coach is seen as a junior manager
or technician, someone who works with developers and other
technical-types so the agile gubbins is plugged in. There\'s little
chance of being invited to the top floor, or the board-room, to discuss
over coffee the various organizational impediments which you see
building up. There\'s even less chance of executives coming down to
where the work is done, and taking a proper look for themselves. The
CEO\'s presence is reserved for management consultants on ten times your
day rate, or real \"celebrity coaches\" with their kumbaya games and
mood-music. You meanwhile are someone to be kept below stairs, under the
control of the delegated subordinates who hired you for their project or
program.

This is the most critical executive fail, since it drives many of the
others we have explored here. It enforces a disjuncture between the
vision of an agile enterprise, and the pro-active sponsorship which is
needed to achieve it.

Fail \#20. Not changing themselves
----------------------------------

If we were to look for a key take-away from this score of executive
agile fails, it would have to be this. It\'s the reluctance of senior
managers to change themselves. If you are one, try asking yourself these
questions. Are you prepared to leave your desk, to wean yourself off
reports, and to see for yourself what is really happening in your
company? Are you willing to make agile transformation your top priority?
Do you really want enterprise change, and not some sort of bolt-on
capability which you think delegates ought to handle? Are you willing to
challenge, and be challenged on, the very idea of what value means to
the organization? Do you see the importance of flow, and the futility of
making projections without empirical evidence?

Now think of it this way. There are many human behaviors we can wish
were altered so our lives would be improved. However there is only one
person whose conduct we can ever really change, and the agile
transformation in your organization quite simply has to start there.
I\'m not going to spell out who that person is. And remember: agile
transformation is a harsh mirror. If you don\'t want to know how ugly
you are, don\'t look in.

###### References

-   [Scrum org - twenty top fails executive agile leadership](https://www.scrum.org/resources/blog/twenty-top-fails-executive-agile-leadership)



