###### [Home](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/blob/master/README.md) | [Agile](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/tree/master/Agile/README.md) |
------------

Information Technology : Multitasking Negative Affects and Cost 
===============================================================

Modern business relies on multitasking to get work done. Employees are
evaluated on their ability to multitask. IT professionals are routinely
assigned to multiple projects. Did we always do this? Does multitasking
work? What are the real impacts of multitasking? Is there an
alternative?

Unitasking is a retronym to represent how we used to work on software
before we multitasked. By multitask here, I really mean \"work on
multiple projects\". Modern business has come to call that multitasking
and considers it to be a strategy for more efficient worker output. We
also multitask at a small scale in our daily lives, at work or not.
There are similarities at both scales in how we do it and what it does
to us.

When we present the Agile story to new audiences, one of the largest
stumbling blocks is the idea that teams work much, much better when
their members are dedicated to the team full time. This is not news. For
years we have assembled \"tiger teams\" and \"swat teams\" to handle
special problems, often in times of crisis. Yet our organizations have
come to prefer a model of individuals in skill silos assigned to
multiple projects at the same time. This is now the de-facto solution to
having a large number of things to do at once. It is considered to be
the most efficiently use of \"scarce resources\", i.e. not enough people
and all of them specialized.

The Agile model turns this on its head. We form teams of people focused
on a small set of things at a time. Instead of creating work and moving
people through it, we create teams of people and move the work through
them. And we pull instead of push.

Change is difficult. Doing things a different way takes a clear purpose,
a vision of benefits and courage. So resistance is natural; people feel
unsafe when things begin to change around them. If we can make a shift
into Lean thinking, we can leverage two central tenants of \"respect for
people\" and \"continuously improve the system\" to define a purpose,
anticipate the benefits and take the first steps toward improvement.
Many people hear \"Lean\" and think about how to be better at doing the
things we are already doing. Lean also says that we can often eliminate
even more waste if we stop doing some things, low-value activities, all
together.

A scientist named Harold Pashler demonstrated this in the early 1990's.
He called it "Dual Task Interference." Pashler theorized that there was
some sort of processing bottleneck happening in a person's brain when
multi-tasking. That people can really only think about one thing at a
time, that a certain amount of effort was involved in packing up one
process, reaching into your memory and pulling out another, and then
running that job. And each time you switch tasks, that process takes
time. Numerous other studies show the same thing.

<kbd>![Context Switching](https://34slpa7u66f159hfp1fhl9aur1-wpengine.netdna-ssl.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/Slide093.jpg)



Cost of Multitasking
====================

A person who works on more than one project incurs a cost at each shift
from one project to the other. The primary cost is the time required to
change context. We know that simple interruptions like a phone call can
cost as much as 15 minutes of recovery time. The more complex the task,
the more time it takes to make the shift.

If you are working on more than two projects the cost can be even
greater. It may have been a long time since you worked on that project,
taking more effort to remember where you left off. Alternately, if you
shift frequently, your context-switching time is a larger proportion of
your work time.

There are studies that show people are pretty good at shifting between
two contexts for small tasks\[3\]. In a short time scale this appears to
have to do with our two brain hemispheres. To a certain extent, we can
parallel process two independent tasks. For larger switches, we should
expect some switching cost. Jerry Weinberg\[4\] showed the escalating
context switching costs accrued if each task has a 10% penalty, in
reality the costs are frequently higher.

<kbd>![](https://res.infoq.com/articles/multitasking-problems/en/resources/2image1.jpg)
<kbd>![context switching](http://www.personalkanban.com/pk/wp-content/uploads/2012/09/context-switching_thumb.png)

When a person is part of a team, either a traditional loosely connected
project team or a focused Agile team, there is a compounded cost of
switching. When a team member leaves to do work not related to the
team's work, the team suffers from the absence of the member. When the
absent member returns, the team spends time to help the returning member
catch up with developments during their absence.

Context-Switching 
-----------------

Let's take a tangent now to talk about the costs of context-switching
(multi-tasking), which is the bane of productivity existence, at least
in an Agile setting. In the 10% effort scenario above, these might
include:

1.  Team members leave or join the team, and new members require
    training, knowledge transfers, or handoffs to other team members.
2.  Roadmap planning introduces new, even higher-priority projects, and
    this 10% effort project is put on hold indefinitely, or even
    canceled. In the last case, any partially completed work by the team
    would be completely wasted.
3.  Work that the team did on the project months earlier is forgotten so
    the team has to slow down to review and refresh memory. Or work done
    earlier becomes irrelevant because technology has been updated or
    changed in some way in the interim, such that rework is required.
4.  The team takes more time/effort to put other projects they were
    working on out of mind and remember what they were doing with this
    10%-effort project when they last worked on it ... and repeating
    that cycle of forgetting/remembering every single time they switch
    from one project to another, as often as every single day, many
    times a day!

Task Switching
--------------

There has been a lot of research on task switching. Here\'s what we know
from the research:

-   It takes more time to get tasks completed if you switch between them
    than if you do them one at a time.
-   You make more errors when you switch than if you do one task at a
    time.
-   If the tasks are complex then these time and error penalties
    increase.
-   Each task switch might waste only 1/10th of a second, but if you do
    a lot of switching in a day it can add up to a loss of 40% of your
    productivity.
-   Task switching involves several parts of your brain: Brain scans
    during task switching show activity in four major areas: the
    pre-frontal cortex is involved in shifting and focusing your 
    [attention](https://www.psychologytoday.com/ca/basics/attention "Psychology Today looks at attention"),
    and selecting which task to do when. The posterior parietal lobe
    activates rules for each task you switch to, the anterior cingulate
    gyrus monitors errors, and the pre-motor cortex is preparing for you
    to move in some way.





Agile Multitasking
==================

An Agile team is cross-functional and is busy doing all sorts of
activities every day. These include elaboration of requirements,
analysis, design, testing and coding. Isn't that multi-tasking? The
answer has to do with the scope of context. Broad jumps in subject
matter and technology require more switching time. Brains are just fine
with shifting activities a little. As a focused team, all of the daily
activities are targeted at a narrow band of functionality and
technology. Only a few stories are being worked on at a time. The
context is narrow even though the range of activities is varied.
Additionally, Agile has a number of devices for keeping focus --
collaboration, task boards, automated testing, retrospection. It is the
wide jumps in context that make trouble -- other projects, other
collaborators, other stakeholders.





Neurosciense of Multitasking
============================

The human brain is good at internal multi-tasking. It is doing it all
day long. It even does it at night. There are many parts of the brain
that are working together and alone all the time. We could not function
in our complex environments otherwise. Most of the multitasking is
subconscious -- filtering of sensory input, integration of related
information, moving data from short term to long term memory, keeping
the heart and lungs going.

And we multitask externally -- driving the car while we navigate and
listen to the traffic reports, talking on the phone while we make
dinner, planning vacation while we are weeding the garden. Some tasks
like folding laundry, walking etc. are mechanical and don't incur a task
switching cost. Others like the keystrokes to navigate through a
document or rename a method can be made mechanical over time. But the
work of software development isn't that simple. Much of this automatic
multitasking works well. It does have its limits, though

The context switching of modern multi-project assignments creates a
potential for mental re-work. Human brains have two separate kinds of
memory -- short term (working memory) and long term. There are
mechanisms for moving information between the two. There is no guaranty
that everything gets moved or that the information going in is the same
that later comes back out. We are constantly editing our memories, every
time we replay them. New information must reside in short term memory
for a length of time before it is moved into long term memory. For
example, cramming for an exam may get you a better grade but you may
remember little of the material two weeks later. Simply that you may not
retain the last things you worked on before the context switch. And
those are likely the things you most want to know when you come back to
the project.

Research suggests many ways in which multitasking is inefficient or even
harmful. Consider:

-   There is evidence that multitasking actually degrades short term
    memory, not just for the topics being multitasked but possibly by
    impacting areas of the brain. Multitasking creates stress; Stress
    invokes the more primitive parts of the brain that are concerned
    with personal safety, pulling energy from the more modern parts
    concerned with higher level thinking. Stress can also damage cells
    needed for new memories.
-   We are more prone to errors when we multitask so the quality of our
    work results goes down. This, of course, adds costs to a project
    because things need to be fixed.
-   Some parts of the brain are sequential processors, able to accept
    only one input at a time.
-   The prefrontal cortex, the part of the brain most used for complex
    cognition and decision making, is the biggest energy consumer in the
    brain. Additional load from multitasking will lead to a quicker
    depletion of cognitive ability and more frequent need for recovery
    time.





Unitasking
==========

Agile Teams
-----------

How do we reduce the amount of multi-tasking for individuals in an Agile
context? We mentioned some approaches to this earlier. A more physical
environment engages more parts of the brain, leading to faster and more
complete synthesis of information. A more focused effort keeps the
context scope narrow. Human interactions and a Scrum Master to
facilitate some of the interactions will help to keep that focus.

Some modern technical practices help improve focus for example:

-   Test Driven Development ( TDD ) helps focus technical work in a narrow band for a short time
-   Continuous Integration ( CI ) helps focus by giving immediate attention to a broken build or failed test
-   Pair Programming ( XP ) helps two people focus on a small area of code

Organizations
-------------

Arguments against multitasking have been known for a long time, yet our
modern corporate culture is habituated to this form of \"load
balancing\" for maximally efficient use of human \"resources\". We
assemble teams of people in loose groupings of skill-providers working
part time on several things at a time. Can you build a high performance
team of part-time members? Or have we come to think that it is more
important that everyone appear to be busy all the time?

One of the hardest parts of learning is to unlearn current behaviors.
This is true for organizations as much as for individuals, it is just
hard to make the mental leap from what we do now to what might work
better. Here is a simple visual argument that might help guide a change
that is not only easier on people, it makes good financial sense.

In this scenario - shown in below. Has of 4 people working on 3 short
projects. The dynamics are the same for more people and larger projects.
In this scenario, the people are multitasking on 4 projects.

<kbd>![](https://res.infoq.com/articles/multitasking-problems/en/resources/image2.jpg)

In this scenario - shown in below. In which the same people form a
single team and complete the projects sequentially. This scenario makes
the very conservative assumption that there are no productivity gains
from teaming or from the reduced number of context switches. Notice that
all projects are completed by the same date in both scenarios but that 2
of the 3 projects finish sooner in this scenario. Imagine the resulting
financial benefits.

<kbd>![](https://res.infoq.com/articles/multitasking-problems/en/resources/image3.jpg)

In this scenario - show in below. With the reduction of context
switching and a modest 10% gain in productivity due to teaming
synergies, we would expect to see all 3 projects finish even sooner as
illustrated.

<kbd>![](https://res.infoq.com/articles/multitasking-problems/en/resources/image4.jpg)



References

-   [Infoq - Multitasking
    problems](https://www.infoq.com/articles/multitasking-problems/)
-   [Scrum Inc - multitasking](https://www.scruminc.com/multitasking/)
-   [Scrum Inc - Alternative to kanban one piece](https://www.scruminc.com/alternative-to-kanban-one-piece/)
-   [Solutions IQ -  agile resolution 1 destroy multi tasking the productivity killer](https://www.solutionsiq.com/learning/blog-post/agile-resolution-1-destroy-multi-tasking-the-productivity-killer/)
-   [Psychology Today - the true cost multi tasking](https://www.psychologytoday.com/ca/blog/brain-wise/201209/the-true-cost-multi-tasking)
-   [Joel on software - human task switches considered harmful](https://www.joelonsoftware.com/2001/02/12/human-task-switches-considered-harmful/)
-   [Linkedin  - how being busy makes you less productive dr travis bradberry](https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/how-being-busy-makes-you-less-productive-dr-travis-bradberry/)
