###### [Home](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/blob/master/README.md) | [Agile](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/tree/master/Agile/README.md) |
------------

Information Technology : SAFe Lean Portfolio Management 
=======================================================


![](https://lm2jj13uhv2157rey3v60xm8-wpengine.netdna-ssl.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/09/Keystone-LPM-WEB-1.png)

The Lean Portfolio Management (LPM) competency aligns strategy and
execution by applying Lean and systems thinking approaches to strategy
and investment funding, Agile portfolio operations, and governance.
These collaborations give the enterprise the ability to execute existing
commitments reliably and better enable innovation by building on the
foundation of the four other core competencies.

The reason for Lean Portfolio Management is straightforward: traditional
approaches to portfolio management inhibit the flow of value and
innovation in the enterprise. They were not designed for a global
economy and the impact of digital disruption. This new reality puts
pressure on enterprises to work with a higher degree of uncertainty yet
deliver innovative solutions much faster. Despite this new reality, many
legacy portfolio practices remain. Typically, these include: Annual
planning and rigid budgeting cycles Measures of progress that focus on
document-driven deliverables and task completion, versus objective
measures of value Perpetual overload of demand versus capacity, which
decreases throughput and belies effective strategy Phase-gate approval
processes that don't mitigate risk and discourage incremental delivery
Project-based funding (moving people to the work) and cost accounting,
which causes friction and unnecessary overhead, finger pointing,
bureaucracy, and delays Overly detailed business cases based on highly
speculative and lagging ROI projections Centralizing and developing
requirements with people who will not be doing the actual implementation
Iron-triangle strangulation (fixed scope, cost, and date projects),
which limits agility and does not optimize the total economic value
Traditional Supplier management and coordination, which favors win-lose
contracts, and focuses on the lowest short-term cost, rather than the
highest lifecycle value Also, when portfolio management is unfamiliar
with software capitalization in Agile, it often impedes the
transformation to Lean-Agile approaches. Clearly, portfolio management
approaches must be modernized to support the new Lean-Agile way of
working. Fortunately, many enterprises have already gone down this path,
and the change patterns are fairly clear, as illustrated in Figure 1.
Most of these will occur naturally in a SAFe transformation, but change
is hard, indeed. Caution and awareness are warranted.

![](https://www.scaledagileframework.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/Extend-the-Portfolio_F01_WP.png)

There are SAFe portfolios that manage a set of value streams for a
specific area of the business.  LPM function conducts its work with the
help of a series of three collaborations that include:

-   Strategy and investment funding
-   Agile portfolio operations
-   Lean governance

These collaborations provide the ability to execute existing commitments
reliably and enable innovation to the enterprise by building on the
foundation of four other competencies.

![](https://www.guru99.com/images/8-2016/090116_0956_WhatisScale3.png)








