###### [Home](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/blob/master/README.md) | [Agile](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/tree/master/Agile/README.md) |
------------


Agile : Transformation Roadmap 
==============================



Agile is more about a change in mindset than
yet-another-process-definition and it encourages the empowerment of
individuals, self-organization, shared responsibility and focus.
Becoming Agile as an organization goes beyond focussing only on Product
Development and Delivery dimensions. It permeates the whole
organization.

Becoming Agile is the way to continuous improvement for any
organization. It enables you to deliver better products, create a
motivative and innovative work environment, achieve a faster time to
market and improve communication with your customers. However, you
cannot buy Agile! It is an individual journey that each organization and
each team within this organization needs to take.

As a companion to this video, we have created a poster with the key
processes of the ETF™. You can hang it on the wall in front of your team
and know that you are never alone. All your little steps are part of a
larger process, all parts of your journey!

Creating the agile transformation roadmap is not an as easy as assuming
it's a "once size fits all" roadmap. While it is ideal to reference
another company's agile transformation roadmap, it important to
recognize that every organization or team has their own unique
challenges, culture, impediments that must be taken into consideration
when creating an agile transformation roadmap.

There are various techniques organizations use to create their roadmaps
and the same technique can be applied when creating an agile
transformation plan. In fact, it is recommended that an agile coach or
champion be present to assist in the creation of the roadmap to help
guide the discussions and to help ensure the most appropriate milestones
are included. When creating the agile transformation roadmap, some
important items that could be included and are listed in no particular
order:

-   Initial Assessment
-   Include a "why" and/or "vision" statement
-   Training of Stakeholders and other members of the organization at
	all team levels
-   What is the scope of the initiative? Organization level or team
	level?
-   Creating the Agile Teams and Champions
-   Creation of subsequent agile transformation project plans, where
	appropriate
-   Define Metrics for Success
-   Creation of an Agile PMO
-   On-Going coaching
-   Inspection and Adaptation
-   Reinforcement
-   When and how to introduce agile adoption
-   Will the organization restructure?
-   Which framework is most appropriate for the organization or team
-   A reasonable date range of the roadmap items
-   Retrospectives at various levels (a plan on how to respond to
	change)
-   Product and project plans
-   Purchasing and training on tools

Once the content of the roadmap items are identified it will be
important to prioritize, but it's equally important to consider the
agile transformation roadmap to be a "temporary" roadmap that can evolve
over time. Much like the agile transformation project plan, the road map
should incorporate feedback collected from frequent retrospection
meaning a roadmap should be inspected and adapted according to change or
newly identified needs that could only be identified once the agile
transformation begins.

After an agile transformation roadmap has been established, subsequent
agile transformation project plans can begin to develop to help define
and plan additional details and requirements for each of the roadmap
items.

The agile transformation plan in addition to an overarching agile
transformation project plan will ensure that an organization and/or team
has properly planned for an agile transformation.



Agile is Tools or Culture
=========================

Agile as a Tool
---------------

Organizations that use agile as a tool often have their processes formed
and deeply embedded. It doesn't mean that they have excellent processes
in place, but they exist, and their people follow them. In this
scenario, the use of independent techniques and tools, such as SCRUM,
Kanban, XP, generate some specific results. Increasing work visibility
using boards, speeding up the process with ceremonies, use of charts
focused on user stories, frameworks to manage activities or programming
techniques is often a gate to something much bigger.

If you are in this state today and want to go further, try to have the
support of someone who knows and has lived through these processes. The
experience of an Agile Coach can help your company see opportunities,
and to invest in improvements to its processes, products, services and
employees.

Agile as a Culture
------------------

We can describe any culture in terms of tangible and intangible
elements. In the tangible elements, there is technology, furniture,
lighting, infrastructure, etc. In the intangible part, we see how people
dress, style of interaction between people, hierarchical structure, and
mindset, among others. For some, focusing on the interaction of
individuals rather than methods and tools may be natural, but for
others, some ongoing support is needed to see this invisible part.
Focusing on the collaborative process rather than contractual
negotiation is a challenge as well. In looking at creating an agile
culture, evolution is not direct, but it is consistent. It requires
discipline and focus, and in the end, the result is transformational.

The five key elements for a culture of change to be evaluated in an
organization before implementing any strategy, are Improvement, Focus,
Urgency, Vision, and Teamwork.

-   **Improvement Culture:** corresponds to how well people in a company
	(including management) take the initiative to improve.
-   **Urgency Culture:** refers to how urgently people care about
	delivering results now, not later.
-   **Teamwork Culture:** refers to how strong people's mutual
	commitment is for working and collaborating together.
-   **Focus Culture:**  evaluates how likely people are to remain
	focused on their tasks, projects and commitments to getting things
	done.
-   **Vision Culture:** is everyone united around a common vision?

These five elements analyzed together, allow a deeper understanding of
organizational culture and how to change it.

The advantage of analyzing all these elements beforehand will enable an
organization to define what results they want after the transformation
stabilizes. Some results should be an increase in quality of their
products and services, greater speed to market, and increased efficiency
in their retention of employees, among others.

Depending on the type of organization, less intense approaches with
gradual changes could be chosen instead of very intense approaches that
may generate some business disruption.

Implimentation
--------------

A guide with three possible approaches is offered to the reader to
reflect on the best way of helping your organization become agile.

1.  **Train and Launch:** Consists essentially of training a group of
	people to teach them some practices and start the work. In this
	model of low intervention, it is expected that the processes are
	gradually improved because those who receive the training will
	gradually experiment with the new ways in their day to day work. On
	the other hand, this approach takes more time to be adopted in the
	organization, and often the necessary changes in the structure of
	the organization do not happen.
2.  **Assess and Coach:** This second approach is often one of the best
	strategies. It allows the organization to define the best
	implementation pace.  The concepts will be customized for each group
	and/or team, and training will be conducted as needed, allowing
	people to learn and develop structural changes to overcome
	obstacles.
3.  **Intensive Implementation:** An intensive implementation will bring
	on the greatest benefits in the short-term. This type of approach is
	recommended when the organization goes through a critical moment of
	survival or wants the changes to be rapidly incorporated into its
	day-to-day operations. In this case, external teams will support
	internal teams so that organizational designs are implemented with
	the results measured over time.

You do not have to choose either agile tools or agile culture to get
started. You can choose both and have the greatest benefits of
everything.

To start, it's important to have a clear objective in mind. Any and all
agile changes need to have a clear context and focus so that the
techniques can be a means and not an end.

In summary, there are several ways to implement agile in organizations.
The best approach is one that can leverage the current status quo and
enable the organization to adopt new practices through existing
resources and knowledge.

Stretagy
========

Agile Strategy Map
------------------

The Agile Strategy Map can be a stand-alone tool for your organization
or it can be used in the context of an approach inspired by the
principles of ORGANIC Agility. In this case, it corresponds to the basic
principle of validating changes in small increments. In this document we
are going to first present some arguments for the importance of
delivering value in small increments to an agile way of working. We will
then discuss engaging people in the process of an agile transformation
and the risks of pushing change. In the rest of the document we will
present instead an alternative way to map and design the desired changes
that make the whole process transparent, incremental, available to
everyone, and based on continuous experimentation and adaptation.

<kbd>![Agile Strategy Map](https://www.agile42.com/media/images/Agile_Strategy_Map.original.png)

### Agile teams deliver in small and frequent increments 

One of the strengths of any team or organization working in an agile way
is their capability to deliver value in frequent iterations and in
smaller increments. This capability has significant advantages compared
to a more common "large batch" approach. First of all, it allows teams
to go through the problems they will face from top to bottom and deal
with all technical and functional difficulties very early. Moreover, it
enables faster feedback loops, which contribute to maintaining focus and
directing the team towards what matters to customers and stakeholders. 

<kbd>![Agile vs ](https://www.agile42.com/media/images/agile_vs_largebatch.width-800.png)

In a nutshell, this means that working with smaller and frequent
releases significantly helps reduce business and technical risk, by
delivering what the customers expect and constantly ensuring that we are
using the appropriate technical approach. Moreover, the frequent release
of value-focused increments also helps mitigate social risk, by
fostering the need for collaboration and trust between team members from
the early phases, which avoids stress down the line. Finally, the
frequent involvement of customers and stakeholders allows teams to
better control both costs and value delivered and enables better
expectation management and an agreement on what to invest in next,
reducing cost and schedule risk. These benefits apply whether we are
developing a new product or introducing an organizational change.

### Engaging people with a change initiative 

The advantages of an agile approach have often led to Agile being
considered as a goal in itself rather than a means of achieving your
business goals. Even if this problem is known in theory, in helping many
organizations start the journey towards becoming more agile, we have
often seen a push towards "making the organization agile" in practice.

When the  [Agile
Manifesto](http://agilemanifesto.org/) was written, the
underlying thought was never about working faster, or being more
efficient, or writing more code lines per hour. In fact, the manifesto
tells us quite the opposite, by proclaiming the importance of achieving
what is called a "sustainable pace". This is of course relative to the
context and the people involved, and it is something to aim for, not a
given, or something that can be calculated, exploited, or standardized
across an organization. Every team will normally find their own
sustainable pace over time, a working speed at which nobody feels
stressed, but also not too relaxed. (This speed is, by the way,
something you measure, not something you define before you start). The
idea of the sustainable pace also has to do with the capability to
sustain that pace indefinitely. This last element is quite important, as
in most organizations the belief that we can push people to work above
their capacity, even if just for a while, seems to be accepted as the
norm. 

Pushing people in general is not a good choice, in particular when we
are dealing with knowledge work. It has been demonstrated that when
working under stress, our brain capabilities degrade significantly, and
a significant reason for people working over capacity is being planned
on multiple projects. Under stress, the part of our brain that takes
control is the instinctive one, also known as System 1 Thinking. System
1 is very efficient, but not very flexible, and normally resorts to
known patterns and mechanical reactions to known "threats". When we need
to be creative, we need the slower part of our brain to work for us,
which is part of System 2. This is the part that is in charge of our
analytical thinking, of our dreaming and creative ideas, the one that
allows us to invent new things, instead of efficiently processing known
ones.

If we understand the deep connection between the constraints and
structures that we build into an environment, and the behaviors these
structures produce - in terms of human reactions to stressors - then we
will want to make sure that changes happen without too much pressure.
Even though we all know the benefits of working without pressure, or
after a good night's sleep, as soon as we are again in an environment
where we are pushed to do things fast, we inevitably fall back into
compliance mode and retreat into behaviors and habits that are typical
of our traditional way of working. 

Let's assume for a moment that your organization is willing to go
through a change initiative, and the benefits are perceived as so
valuable that nobody doubts that it will be worth pursuing. Even in this
hypothetical and very unlikely thought experiment, how much could we
resist pushing people through it, instead of allowing people to
internalize the change at their own speed and co-evolve with the system?
Since we know the answer, we feel that allowing people to move towards
accepting the change, as a first step, would be a waste of time. 

This is the moment when, instead of being supportive and respectful of
everyone's need to understand and adapt, we inadvertently begin
generating what we call "resistance to change". Continuing with our
thought experiment, what if we were able to share a common and
measurable goal that everyone would understand and would be willing to
pursue over time? What if, instead of telling people what to do, we
would allow them to try safe-to-fail experiments geared toward achieving
that goal? Based on the results of these experiments, we would encourage
people to share their approaches and replicate these conditions across
the whole organization. As crazy as it sounds, you will be surprised
about how much faster and more sustainably these changes will grow
within your organization. 

Back to reality, we all know that finding ourselves in a situation in
which everyone within an organization, no matter the size, agrees to
change or to a common approach to change is very rare. This next section
is about identifying ways to create the sense of urgency that will allow
us to initiate change. Instead of making it explicit, or a mandate, we
will explore ways in which it can emerge by analyzing common needs or
dissatisfactions. Any change requires a motive, and this motive needs to
be internalized by as many people as possible in order to make the
change not only accepted, but also thoroughly lived. In this way we can
also avoid the risk of local optimization, which can be a result of
naive efforts to increase local efficiency, rather than focusing on
client value delivery by taking the client or market perspective. We
want to find ways in which we can engage step by step the whole
organization, and align it behind a common agreed direction.

### Managing uncertainty through experimentation 

The idea of experimenting is quite interesting and engaging for most of
us coaches, but it is more often than not a tough sell for leadership
teams within organizations. It is really hard to convince hard driven
managers, with targets and deadlines, to experiment on something without
knowing what the outcomes will be. It ultimately boils down to one of
the hardest things to accept:  *uncertainty*. When talking to top
managers and C-Level people instead, the level of acceptance is much
higher due to their natural predisposition to keep multiple options
open. Paradoxically, it is easier to sell top managers a portfolio of
safe-to-fail experiments with different probabilities of success and a
clear strategy to manage the risk, than to discuss starting or not a
single experiment.

### A not so new approach to risk 

Nowadays it is very hard to base our risk management strategy on
robustness, in this case predicting and preventing failure. Risk used to
be visualized as a bell curve, which makes its management complicated
and slow, by focusing on what lies inside the bell curve alone. Rare,
one-off events (Black Swans, in Nassim Nicholas Taleb's terminology) are
impossible to predict that way, and are therefore especially destructive
--- they have a greater impact. If we rely on what we think we "know",
what will potentially hit us the most is what we actually don't know, or
what we think we know just "ain't" so. By accepting the possibility of
failure, an organization can instead orient its strategy towards early
detection, fast recovery and fast exploitation. Statistical techniques
are still valuable for  ***probable***  events, and simulations and
scenario planning allow us to gain some clarity in the realm of 
**possible** events, but when it comes to the enormous number of 
**plausible** events, we need to use abductive logic to draw connections
between multiple events and seeking coherent (but not necessarily true
at this point) explanations. 

In order to broaden the spectrum of options available and to be able to
discover what might help and what not, we need to approach risk
management as a whole in a more experimental way. Focusing on
probability alone will not work; we will have to learn what is possible
and what is plausible. We can formulate hypotheses based on intuition,
but those hypotheses will not be used to make decisions, but rather to
start multiple parallel experiments to validate those hypotheses. This
approach requires us to be open to observing and listening to everything
that happens, especially if it is unexpected.

The comprehensive framework of the Agile Strategy Map has proven to
serve as a good catalyst for change and coordinating multiple, parallel
experiments.

### Roots of the Agile Strategy Map 

Now we have learned something about incremental and iterative change, we
have learned something about the importance of initiating change from
the customer's perspective, and about engaging people within the
organization from the early stages, so that the need for change will
emerge and will start to be "pulled" by volunteers who feel close to the
improvements and feel they can contribute. We have also described the
possibility of evolving incrementally, and using an experimental
approach to validate hypotheses before getting started. These options
are all built into the Agile Strategy Map. This framework has been
developed through our experiences with clients and the help of many
coaches who contributed over time to refine and improve its usability.

<kbd>![The Strategy
Cycle](https://www.agile42.com/media/images/wardley-circle.width-800.png)

Agile Strategy Map's origins are rooted in  [Eliyahu Goldratt's
"Strategy and Tactics
Tree"](https://www.toc-goldratt.com/tocweekly/2011/06/gst_a_step-by-step_guide_for_change/)
, a thinking process codified in his Theory of Constraints. This
provides a model for aligning and synchronizing continuous improvement.
The Agile Strategy Map tool evolved into a framework that can be used in
multiple circumstances: it helps with maintaining coherence towards a
common goal, aligns everyone on the current state of affairs, and allows
us to straightforwardly track dependencies. It also merges strategic
priorities with tactical and operational needs, allowing for a more
focused approach. 

Additionally, the work of Peter Senge, presented in his book  *[The
Fifth Discipline, the Art and Practice of a Learning
Organization](https://amzn.to/2DnI5i8)* , has been a
significant influence. Validating change in small increments is
essentially about building a culture and discipline of learning, rather
than simply defining a plan that we presume will result in achieving our
Goal. To quote Senge,  *"In the long run, the only sustainable source of
competitive advantage is your organization's ability to learn faster
than its competition.\[...\] If there is one single thing a learning
organization does well, it is helping people embrace change"*.
Furthermore, Senge's "Wheel of Team Learning" provides a simple way to
consider the process of collective learning and reflects the set-up and
running of the Agile Strategy Map: we identify shared needs and goals
(Shared Meaning, in Senge's terms), co-create the Agile Strategy Map
(Joint Planning), agree on validating through collaborative actions
(Coordinated Action) and make it transparent for all to see (Public
Reflection). 

This is not the first iteration of the Agile Strategy Map, so you might
already be familiar with one of its previous versions. We have been
using it for many years with multiple clients and have learned through
these experiences. Common feedback included challenges of the map being
too abstract or being difficult to understand how to take action based
on it. Other feedback has included a sense that the organization feels
like they need to start from scratch, ignoring things they've done in
the past. As part of the response to this feedback, we have recently
incorporated the work of Simon Wardley into the conception of the
Strategy Map. The inclusion of new elements, such as Confirmed Success
Factors (explained below) also goes a long way towards addressing these
concerns.  By combining the thinking of Wardley with the strategy
mapping tool, we believe we have significantly enhanced its expressivity
and its ease of use. 

Wardley speaks of real maps not only being  **visual** and 
**context-specific**, but also showing  **positioning** in relation to
an  **anchor** and  **movement**. Many things that we use and call maps
in the workplace are not maps at all, lacking at least one of those
elements. If they don't include an anchor (that would be the North on a
geographical map) to support clear direction and positioning to show us
where we are in relation to other elements on the map, then how can we
use the map to orientate ourselves? Wardley has combined the thinking of
OODA loops (the decision-making cycle of observe, orient, decide, and
act) from military strategist John Boyd and "The Art of War" from
Chinese general Sun Tzu (VI-V century b.C.) to create a basic cycle for
thinking about strategy.

Using this cycle we begin to see that the strategy changes based on the
needs and the maturity of the market and where we want to go next. This
has of course a significant impact on the way organizations are
structured and operate.

### Strategy tools 

To sum up, based on Wardley's insights, good strategy tools are:

-   Visual → easy and intuitive
-   Context specific → relevant to the context (different parts of the
	business might have a different strategy or different products and
	it is important to know what is universally applicable and what is
	not)
-   Positional → displaying connections  and current state to help
	navigate the map
-   Anchor → acts as a reference for direction
-   Movement → suggested changes and where are we going / where have we
	been

<kbd>![Characteristics of good strategy tools](https://www.agile42.com/media/images/5characteristics.original.png)

Working with the Agile Strategy Map 
-----------------------------------

### The Goal {#Agile-TransformationRoadmap-TheGoal}

The Agile Strategy Map is a real visual map that includes the elements
of anchor, position, and movement. In principle it is a way to visualize
a goal, as well as the success factors and dependencies that are
relevant to moving in the right direction. The  **anchor** of an Agile
Strategy Map is a Goal, which can be expressed as a specific target,
measurable and timed, or simply as a direction towards which to move. It
represents the business goal and creates focus for the strategy,
orienting all other elements. Since the Map is also 
**context-specific**, the Goal will need to fit the context of where the
organization is and where it intends to go.

<kbd>![Agile Strategy Map goal](https://www.agile42.com/media/images/Goal.width-800.png)

It is also very important for the Goal to be outcome-based, not
output-based, which means that it must be connected to creating value to
users, customers, and/or employees. Stakeholder value is a product of
the fact that customers and users are satisfied and employees are
engaged.

If the Goal is a specific target, it is possible to use different
techniques to formulate it, such as the  [SMART
checklist](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SMART_criteria).
An example of such a Goal can be:  *"Strengthening our position in
mobile services by increasing the number of annual mobile service's
customers by 20% over the next 12 months"*. Alternatively, we have in
the past successfully used the  ["Remember the future"
technique](https://www.innovationgames.com/remember-the-future/),
which is based on numerous studies in cognitive psychology investigating
how we think about the future:  *"Imagine that you fall asleep now and
wake up in 12-18 months. What key changes do you see around that make
you happy?"* These kind of questions generate more richly detailed and
sensible goals, because it is easier to understand and describe a future
event in the past tense than a possible future event, even if neither
has occurred. By thinking of a future event as one that has already
occurred, we also pave the way for imagining possible factors that will
enable or accelerate generating the event.

*In the case of the Goal as a direction, according to complexity
thinking, it can be expressed and measured in terms of Vector Tracking
(as direction and speed of change). The target for the organization can
then be the direction and speed of change. For instance:  *"We want to
increase our customer satisfaction 20% faster than it is currently
growing, so we will be outpace out competition and increase our market
share significantly".**

*Even if we have defined the Goal, we want a way of reminding ourselves
that we should challenge what we are trying to achieve as often as
possible, because reality and conditions around us change very quickly.
The volatility we are dealing with nowadays is such that it is very
risky to base medium- and long-term plans on current situational
analysis without planning for continuous adaptations. The Goal itself
might be discovered over time, or at least refined, if not reshaped, by
integrating new insights. The Agile Strategy Map process is supportive
of continuous adaptations and injections of new insights, allowing us to
maintain coherence and transparency at the same time.\
*

### Exploring the existing Landscape: Confirmed Success Factors 

Virtually every organization has some kind of strategy, or at least has
a plan to get to some definition of success. We recognize that most
organizations have achieved some level of success in the past, whether
intentionally or just out of luck. Even when these strategies are very
static and expose an underlying linear and mechanical thinking, it is
important to show appreciation for what the organization has achieved,
and identify what has helped the company be successful in the past.

**Confirmed Success Factors (CSFs)** are an expression of the successful
factors that have led company to its current state and will provide a
picture of the past Landscape and Patterns (to refer back to the concept
of the map). These - in line with the ORGANIC metaphor - could be
considered like an organism's acquired capabilities, which became part
of its DNA as a result of an evolutionary process. The CSFs might be in
the form of processes, rules, policies, constraints, approaches, in
short everything that is established as a way of working within the
organization, as well as established value propositions to existing
customers. All these things, learned over time and validated, are assets
to the organization, and are probably responsible for a significant part
of the overall revenue. Given the defined Goal, we may be able to
identify a subset of CSFs that will be enablers for achieving the goal.
We want to be clear about focusing on those that we believe to be
relevant to the Goal and its specific context. This might seem like a
hard decision, but if you want to achieve success you need to focus on
what is most important to you and relevant to your business.

<kbd>![Confirmed Success Factor](https://www.agile42.com/media/images/CSF.width-800.png)

The term "Confirmed Success Factor" emphasizes that we have attained
some knowledge and that this lesson has been retained and consolidated
into an organizational asset. A CSF is, then, always in the 
*Obvious* or  *Complicated* domain according to the Cynefin framework. 
[Read more about the Cynefin framework
domains.](https://www.agile42.com/en/all-agile/agile-strategy-map/cynefin/)

A Confirmed Success Factor may be expressed in the following form:

### By \<...\> We learned \<...\> And this helped us \<\...\>  

As mentioned previously, it represents an acquired capability for the
organization that can act as  an enabler towards achieving the goal. The
fact that the CSF is achieved and known doesn't mean that we won't have
to do anything about it. On the contrary, a CSF is like a lever that we
can use to enable our organization to achieve success and needs to be
oiled and maintained, or it will decay and lose relevance. To maintain
and continuously evolve a CSF we require at least one  **Necessary
Condition**. This can act as an anticipatory trigger, reacting to or
prompting specific events/needs, for example periodically reviewing a
policy to check how it's performing against some Key Performance
Indicators (KPIs). We can create triggers in the form of Necessary
Conditions, connected to the KPIs or to a specific moment in time. The
dimension of time is also integrated into the Strategy Map, so if the
NCs are connected to a date (likely at some point in the future), they
should be placed in the Future column of the strategy map, while still
being linked to the relevant CSF. If we are unable to define what is
necessary for maintaining the Confirmed Success Factors, this may be a
sign that they have not actually been confirmed/validated or perhaps
that they are no longer relevant.

### Define hypotheses to test explicitly: Potential Success Factors 

Going back to the  [Cynefin
framework](https://www.agile42.com/en/all-agile/agile-strategy-map/cynefin/),
and looking deeper into the  *Unordered* Domains, or the domains in
which it is impossible to determine causality without uncertainty, we
can recognize two different domains:  *Complex* and  *Chaotic*. In the 
*Complex Domain*, because we do not yet know what we don't know, the
path towards validating a Goal is never straightforward. Most of the
time we have to understand and analyze our hypotheses and challenge our
assumptions in order to figure out our next move. For this reason, the
next step in the creation of an Agile Strategy Map is the definition of
those hypotheses that might help us move towards the Goal. These
hypotheses need to be made explicit, so that through transparency
dependencies can be made visible. The primary purpose of declaring
explicitly what could be helpful towards achieving the goal, is to
identify changes or adaptations that can be used to our advantage.
Ideally we would want to have many alternative hypotheses available, and
we shouldn't discard them right away. At this level a good set of 10 to
14 different hypotheses, would provide  enough options to explore and
avoid focusing only on the obvious ones. Hypotheses can be naive, or
even completely stretched: as long as they are plausible and coherent,
they are good. These hypotheses are captured using  **Potential Success
Factors (PSFs)**. The name is a reminder that they are still to be
validated.\

<kbd>![PSF](https://www.agile42.com/media/images/PSF.width-800.png)

A Potential Success Factor is expressed in the following form: 

### By \<...\> We expect \<...\> Which will help us \<\...\>  

Given the example of Goal:  *"Increase by 20% the number of annual
mobile service's customers"*, an example of a PSF can be:  *"By creating
new free services, we expect to attract more people to our platform,
which will help us increase the potential for conversion into paying
customers". *

PSFs are designed to be validated or invalidated through rapid
experimentation. After they are validated, they will provide more
insight into our strategy and increase or decrease the level of
confidence in moving forward in one direction or another. If we feel
confident about a PSF then it will eventually be converted into a
Confirmed Success Factor (CSF). Once we have defined the PSFs, we
visualize them underneath the goal to make them transparent and take
full advantage of the visual capabilities of the tool. Since it is
important to base decision-making on context, we have to make explicit
which kind of hypothesis is described in each PSF: The Potential Success
Factors either represent known unknowns (which then means we are in the 
*Complicated* domain), or unknown unknowns (in which case we are in a 
*Complex* domain).

### Decide what to focus on

As we said at the beginning, if we want to be able to focus on small
validated changes, we must decide which PSFs we want to work on first.
Contrary to a more traditional way, we don't want to actually prioritize
the PSFs but rather make them smaller so that we validate their impact
on the goal faster and more effectively. Every Success Factor (PSF or
CSF) should have a  ***Champion*** , who will work to build a cohort
that can collaborate and focus on moving the PSF forward, and who will
remain the Champion if the PSF becomes a CSF. The cohort is what we call
an  ***Improvement Squad*** , as its objective is to improve the
organization and the work of everyone involved, not to mention the
results, by exploiting new capabilities or leveraging existing ones.

### Validate the hypothesis: Necessary Conditions 

We need to find ways to validate our hypotheses as fast as possible,
empirically, and without relying on assumptions that ultimately increase
risk. This can be achieved by designing small, safe-to-fail experiments.
Before getting there though, we need to identify what it is necessary in
order to be able to define such experiments. What do we need to have in
place or deal with in order to be able to validate the hypothesis? These
may be things we need to change or implement, or they may be constraints
that we must address in some way. These "necessities" will also be
captured using Necessary Conditions (NCs) which should also highlight
(in the Experiment Canvas capability of the Agile Strategy Map) what
could go wrong if they aren't fulfilled. This helps prioritizing and
identifying dependencies. Once all the NCs have been fulfilled, we
should be able to define one or more experiment(s). 

<kbd>![Agile Strategy Map Necessary Condition](https://www.agile42.com/media/images/NC.width-800.png)

A Necessary Condition may be expressed in the following form: 

### We need to \<\....\> Otherwise \<...\>.  

Given the example of the PSF above, an example of NC can be: * "We need
to create at least one additional free service in order to measure
increased subscriptions, otherwise we won't be able to understand the
impact"*, or * "We need to measure existing conversion rates, otherwise
we won't be able to set an appropriate target and measure the increased
conversion because of free services"*.

In short, the Necessary Conditions will bring the strategy to a tactical
level and allow operational work to start. They help in either
validating a PSF, in planning the roll-out of a newly identified CSF, or
in structuring the management of an existing CSF. 

Relationships between Necessary Conditions and PSFs/CSFs/Experiment
Canvas give different meaning to a NC depending on where it is
visualized on the Strategy Map. Here is a summary table defining the
meaning of each specific relationship.

<kbd>![Table of elements of Agile Strategy Map](https://www.agile42.com/media/images/agile_strategy_map_elements_table.width-800.png)

### Tips {#Agile-TransformationRoadmap-Tips}

1.  If we see the pattern of a NC being applicable across multiple PSFs,
	we can have a reasonably high level of confidence that we will get a
	high return on effort if we manage to effectively address that
	condition. In this case it doesn't matter in which order we tackle
	the Success Factors, because the first one will need to address the
	NC, and therefore the second one will need less work to move
	forward.
2.  What level of granularity makes sense in the Agile Strategy Map?
	This is a very common question and there isn't a clear answer.
	However, there are some considerations that can help answer the
	question on a contextual basis:\
	1.  If the level of granularity of Success Factors is too low, we
		might end up with uncertainty regarding whether we are dealing
		with a CSF or a PSF, because it might be both. To make it
		clearer, here is an example Success factor from a Car
		manufacturer:  *"Cars with low emissions are easier to sell"*. 
		*"We learned from experience that this is true"*,  *"We have
		data backing this fact"*,  *"We know how to reduce emissions
		today"*. The above three statements are verified.  *"We need to
		keep researching how to make cars more efficient in the
		future"*. This is not verified and requires experimentation. We
		don't know yet the how but we know that this might be important
		for continuing to sell. So how would we represent this on the
		Agile Strategy Map? 

**Option A:** This could be a Confirmed Success Factor (known knowns)
with a Necessary condition that states the need to review the technology
every three months, which in turn could start a research initiative on
the portfolio. 

**Option B:** Break the CSF down into multiple and more specific CSFs,
which highlight what is currently known, and a PSF for the hypothesis.
Option A is preferable because this stays at a level where it avoids
getting bogged down in technical details. It would also allow the same
Champion and Improvement Squad to maintain control of what is known, but
also keep growing the acquired knowledge so that it never becomes
obsolete and irrelevant. 

### Safe-to-fail Experiments

As soon as you have identified which are the Potential Success Factors
you want to focus on, you pull those from the Future/Potential position
to the Present/On going position of the Agile Strategy Map and start
creating experiments to validate those hypotheses. To get quick feedback
and make decisions, the recommended duration of the experiments is 4 to
12 weeks.

<kbd>![Agile Strategy Map experiment](https://www.agile42.com/media/images/Experiment.width-800.png)

If we go back to 
[Cynefin](https://www.agile42.com/en/all-agile/agile-strategy-map/cynefin/) and
complexity thinking, we can see that experiments in the complicated
domain are meant to evaluate possible options, while experiments in the
complex domain are meant to let new options emerge. Therefore, for the
complicated domain, we run one experiment and validate it. When dealing
with situations in the complex domain, we suggest running multiple
parallel experiments, as the context in which the experiments are
executed might change quite rapidly. By having multiple parallel
experiments, we will be able to recognize recurring pattern(s) across
those experiments, identify the possible catalysts that sustain those
patterns, and finally validate that what we have identified are actual
catalysts by testing those on all the experiments in parallel. This type
of approach isn't possible when running a single experiment. The quality
of the situational analysis will also be greatly amplified by having
multiple different datasets. The recurring patterns might lead to
options (the identified catalysts) for which we want to define
additional experiments, now in the complicated domain, in order to
evaluate the most appropriate one(s). We use an Experiment Canvas,
integrated in the Agile Strategy Map framework, to help articulate what
are the things we need to know and measure when running an experiment.

#### Decide which experiments to start 

With small validated changes in mind, we probably won't start running
all experiments at once, but decide which are the most appropriate to
run first, pull them into the central column of the Agile Strategy Map,
which is the present/validation column, and place the others in the
future/potential column. The faster you can validate or invalidate your
hypotheses, the earlier you will have an understanding of how to develop
your strategy. In this phase more Necessary Conditions might emerge as
preconditions for experimentation, depending on the level of complexity
you are dealing with. As soon as you have fulfilled all the NCs required
for the current experiments, there should be no further delays. Every
experiment should have predefined success and failure conditions, as
well as amplifying and dampening actions. Identifying those before you
start helps you make validated choices without unnecessary interference
and track progress over time. It will also help to empower the team
which will run the experiment, by providing clear boundaries and
suggestions on what to do when specific success or failure conditions
are met. 

### Reporting on experiments' results 

When running an experiment we don't want to wait 8-12 weeks to assess
and communicate if it was a success or a failure. You can instead
visualize the real-time status for each experiment: Each time the
experiment team decides that one of the success conditions in the
experiment is fulfilled, they are empowered to tick it off. The same
applies to failure conditions. This is mapped by a line moving upwards
or downwards to indicate the level of success/failure over time, which
can increase confidence in making decisions on how to move forward. 

### Agile Strategy Map Roles 

The following roles connected to the Agile Strategy Map are not
mandatory, but we have found them critical for the success of any
strategic change: 

**Sponsor:** The Sponsor is usually at the C-level or an executive
leader. The Agile Strategy Map Sponsor is the person responsible for the
budget the organization needs to invest in change. She advocates for the
overall strategy and supports the Champions and the Improvement Squads
in their initiatives. In some cases, depending on the size and
complexity of the organization, we may form a Guiding Coalition of
leaders who are responsible for dealing with large organizational
constraints and insuring overall strategic coherence. 

**Champions: **Each PSF or CSF has a Champion who advocates for it and
ensures that it is getting the proper attention. They are usually a
senior leader or an opinion maker, who can influence others and help
create the proper environments for feedback and learning. Champions will
recruit an Improvement Squad as they feel appropriate. All Champions
together will form a team to collaborate on the overall strategy map,
focusing on individual Success Factors as well as overall map design and
movement. 

**Improvement squad: **In most cases, the Success Factor Champion will
need help to define and accomplish the NCs, design any experiments
needed, or deal with constraints or prerequisites for an experiment to
start. Each Champion should recruit an Improvement Squad, a cohort of
people who can contribute to moving forward with the necessary actions.
Notice that it is a Squad and not a Team because it will change
composition over time, depending on what is necessary for supporting the
change. 

**Experiment team:** Once an Experiment Canvas is designed, a
volunteer-based experiment team is formed to carry out the experiment.
This team remains stable for the whole duration of the experiment. While
they run the experiment, the Improvement Squad supports the process and
monitors the outcome. The same experiment team may be able to run more
than one experiment as long as they aren't dependent on each other.

### Evaluate and Validate  

<kbd>![Agile Strategy Map evaluate and validate](https://www.agile42.com/media/images/visible_strategy_map.width-800.png) 

### Collect data at regular intervals  

Make sure the Strategy Map is visible to the whole organization and set
up a system so that everyone can contribute. There are multiple ways to
leverage the collective intelligence and cognitive diversity in your
organization. For instance, create a straightforward way for anyone to
give feedback on the strategy in terms of Goals, PSFs/CSFs, and NCs.
The  *Improvement Squad* discussed in "Roles" is an additional way to
involve more people. They can visualize the activities related to the
different NCs on a Tactical Board, which is both a way to move from
strategy to operations and a very powerful information radiator. 

Once the experiments have started, you should be able to collect
up-to-date metrics regularly. This can happen at very fast intervals, or
even in cycles of 1 to 2 weeks. The data should help us understand in
which direction and at which speed the experiments are moving (Vector
Tracking, as described above), which should allow us to make decisions
faster. 

In complex environments we have multiple safe-to-fail
experiments/options for each success factor. Here, we are trying to
understand what patterns emerge, so that we can start amplifying the
good (those that give us the results we are looking for) and dampening
the bad. Occasionally we discover unintended consequences or hidden
patterns that impact parts of the organization or factors that we did
not consider. We could end up solving additional problems in this way. 

In complicated environments we gather data and evaluate the options. We
can then decide if the Potential Success Factor can become a Confirmed
Success Factor and how to close the feedback loop to check on the
necessary conditions. 

### Observe the projects interfering as little as possible 

We define amplifying actions and dampening actions before the experiment
starts. Note that some experiments might be designed to fail, so in that
case the "success conditions" will be about failing. The creation of
these conditions and actions provides a set of enabling constraints with
triggers to action, which helps create a safe-to-fail environment for
the experiment team.

### Validate the results and learnings 

While experiments are running - particularly in the  *Complex* Domain of
Cynefin - we have to constantly monitor the emerging patterns. To be
sure they are actual patterns, we need to evaluate their stability and
validate their repeatability by identifying which enabling constraints
can reproduce them. These constraints can take the form of catalysts,
which can both amplify the effects of positive patterns, as well as
dampen the effects of negative ones. Will these catalysts help to
reproduce the positive effects we have observed during the experiment?
How could we transfer those learnings and benefit to the organization as
a whole? The answer to these questions will help us make decisions about
whether to roll out the learnings or not. Remember that we are talking
about a Success Factor, which should be leveraged to achieve our goal,
so if we are unsure about it, then there is no benefit to rolling it
out. 

### Engage with all relevant stakeholders 

Engage with all relevant stakeholders and parties in the organization to
initially set up the Agile Strategy Map and to understand the
implications of a roll-out. Make sure all necessary preparation is
complete before roll-out, so that the transition to the new system is as
quick as possible. Use the stakeholders to support the transition and
engage with all involved to increase acceptance and reduce resistance. 

### Roll out the change 

By supporting everyone involved, finding out fast what works and what
doesn't, and providing support where problems arise, you will make your
roll-out smoother and more effective. In this phase it is very important
to handle all impediments promptly by ensuring through frequent meetings
that they are removed as fast as possible to maintain momentum.

Agile Teams - Squads, Chapters, Tribes, and Guilds
--------------------------------------------------

There is a growing trend around agile company organization
reorganization with Agile and Scrum.

Why Reorganise?  
---------------

Obviously building a product that is flexible, high quality and that can
react to market demand quickly is important, but for me having a process
and organization that emulates this is as equally as important.

"Don't just fix the product, fix the process too"

If we look at real life examples of company's who have failed, who cope
with legacy technology, and those who embrace change and innovate

One of the key reasons is scalability, as your company grows, you need
to be in a position to expand and grow easily and painlessly. Especially
in smaller companies. For example when you have a small startup, usually
roles are quite vague and people generally do what ever it takes to get
things done. This is fine in the early days because you need to move
fast and deliver, but as you grow this is not a sustainable model.

You will find there will start to be conflict, people stepping on each
others toes which is only resolved usually by assigning roles and
responsibleness.

Scrum promotes that you have feature teams, fully autonomous teams that
have end-to-end responsibility for what they build:

<kbd>![](https://miro.medium.com/max/869/0*l68PzRj2YTWLWVpQ.png) 

Many companies utilize this; Spotify being the most famous at the moment
and are currently the poster-boy for Agile, and even in my own
experience this is one of the most optimal ways to manage product
development. Spotify also renames their development teams 'Squads' which
is a cool idea to get over the stigma that a Development Team should
only contain developers. I have looked into other companies that have
adopted this naming convention, and some that have even come up with
their own such as:

-   Crew
-   Party
-   Unit
-   Faction
-   Troop
-   Lineup

Although renaming your team won't automatically change everything and
make your team instantly more effective, if you are making some
organizational changes, restructuring or adapting scrum from waterfall
--- its a good way to detach yourself from the old way of doing things
and can make the change more of an impact.

### Agile Team Have Strengths  

People sometimes ask me what it is that makes agile teams different? The
biggest difference is the strengths that such teams have, the qualities
that make them stand out.

Examples of strengths that I see in well-performing agile teams are:

-   Team members have the skills that help them to communicate and
	collaborate in multiple ways. If they run into difficulties, they
	try something else.
-   By being capable to manage themselves teams can get rid of
	micromanagement by product, project, or line managers.
-   Team members perceive less pressure, they are truly able to work at
	a constant pace. This also significantly reduces the risk of
	burn-out.
-   Teams are able to recognize impediments early, and deal with them
	effectively.
-   It's easier for such teams to stand up against unnecessary outside
	interference. They do take in feedback, but remain in control
	themselves.
-   Teams can live with things that are unclear as they are able to
	raise issues, clarify, and solve them themselves.

Organizations with teams that possess one or more of the skills listed
above might see significant improvement in team performance and the
value that is delivered by teams.

### Leveraging team strengths  

Strong teams can get even stronger if they manage to leverage their
skills and the strengths that they have. This kind of positive
improvement can work wonders; the biggest advantage is that instead of
asking people to stop doing something and change you're asking them to
do more of what they are already doing and what they are good at.

If teams want to improve their performance and continuously become
better in the things that they are doing great, I recommend doing 
[strengths-based
retrospectives](https://www.benlinders.com/2013/using-solution-focused-in-a-strengths-based-retrospective/).
Solution-focused retrospective techniques help teams to increase their
awareness of their strengths and exploit them to deal with the
challenges that they are facing.

### Improving strengths organizational-wide  

If you want to leverage strengths between teams to improve the
organization as a whole, then you can use one or more of the approaches
listed below:

-   Use Open Spaces to identify strengths and connect people who possess
	them with people who are interested in developing them.
-   Build Communities of Practice (CoP) where people share their
	experiences and learn from each other.
-   Arrange contests where people and teams can showcase their outcomes
	together with the strengths that enable them to produce them.
-   Play games with people from different teams to recognize strengths
	and arrange for people to pair up and help each other. A possible
	exercise is Learning by Sharing Challenges, described in my book 
	[The Agile Self-assessment
	Game](https://www.benlinders.com/the-agile-self-assessment-game/).

There's a special edition of the Agile Self-assessment Game aimed at
organizational-wide improvement. With this serious card game,
organizations can discover how agile their teams are and what they can
do to increase their agility to deliver more value to their customers
and stakeholders.

How Can You Implement in your Team?  
-----------------------------------

This concept works well if you have a quite large organization, and you
have mature scrum teams. Spotify was born an agile company, so most of
these things are sewn into their DNA, but for companies or teams
transitioning to scrum it can be a lot more difficult, this concept
needs a not of buy-in and and motivation from the team.

Although you might not be able to implement this model, there are some
things that you can take away from it.

Renaming your 'Teams' / Squads 
------------------------------

As I said before, if you want to remove the stigma of 'Development
Teams' only containing developers, you can rename your team to one of
the suggestions earlier in the post. I like the idea of a crew; reminds
me of the crew on a ship --- each has their role to ensure the ship
stays on track to their destination; its a good metaphor to use.

However, your team must represent this, they need to be a fully
autonomous, cross functional team that has full responsibilities and
little to no dependencies on others. Ideally teams should be around 5 to
7 people in size. This ensures that they can be easily managed and any
meetings can be kept efficient, any smaller and there is no real value
and any larger the team becomes more difficult to manage.

<kbd>![](https://miro.medium.com/max/581/0*95T-REKjoOgdYlHG.png) 

Chapters
--------

Most companies will probably have a smaller variation of this, you will
have a team of developers reporting to a manager, and a team of QA
reporting to a different manager. In the teams that I work with I
actually like to flatten the hierarchy and remove 'Manager' where
possible. You can adopt this model by having your front office
developers reporting to a 'lead', back office developers reporting to a
'lead' and testers / QA reporting to a 'lead'. If you have full stack
developers then it might be a little more difficult, but it can still be
done.

<kbd>![](https://miro.medium.com/max/790/0*_xbKvvSPFVeB-gyf.png)

Guilds 
------

Guilds can be a little more difficult to implement, they require
motivation from the team and can require some degree of coordination. I
would advise to start with something small, identify a problem or
something that can be improved and get together a small group of team
members together to solve it. Assign a lead to the group (does not have
to be a 'lead' or management figure --- its actually better if its not
because it can give opportunity to team members) and use this as your
'pilot'. Chose something technical ideally, something that the team
would enjoy to work on, this way when other team members see the results
and outcome, other guilds would easier to form. You can start in such
areas as:

-   Performance monitoring / optimization
-   Testing automation
-   Security & vulnerabilities.
-   Services & Architecture
-   Documentation & Centralized information center (Wiki)

<kbd>![](https://miro.medium.com/max/963/0*gW3xn-oOIOi1nUx7.png)

You can even add badges or logos for your teams to add a bit of 'fun' to it.

Below are examples taken from an online gaming/betting website.

Clans 
-----

<kbd>![](https://miro.medium.com/max/844/0*O8ZJ4FEwwdBLeteB.png)

Teams 
-----

<kbd>![](https://miro.medium.com/max/825/0*ueiEncNwVdRdQ_ID.png)


Guilds
------

<kbd>![](https://miro.medium.com/max/705/0*fpwbK5f39CeR-bem.png)

Tribes
------

Tribes are a bit more difficult, and I would not advise you implement
unless you have a large complicated infrastructure that needs to be
split this way. If you have different applications such as web, mobile
web, native client / native application or native mobile application, do
not split these. You are introducing dependencies then, its for better
to have an autonomous team that can build a feature and deploy it on all
channels, and not have to wait for another team to complete. This may
require changes in your architecture or process, but in end I think its
the best way forward.

<kbd>![](https://miro.medium.com/max/1125/0*g5-E_KN52m-Mr4Nd.png)

GUILD CON 
---------

If you really want to get creative, you can arrange events for your
guilds. One concept I came up with was 'Guild Con', this could be a day
where each of the guilds presents to the others on what they have been
working on, share tips and knowledge or even try to recruit people to
join.

<kbd>![](https://miro.medium.com/max/721/0*r1bPPwSlvR4RzQM2.png)

You could also arrange 'hack days' or team challenges for your guilds,
to come up with a new concept, idea or prototype to be judged at the end
of the day for a prize.

By doing something like this, give the guilds more of a sense of
purpose, and can be great for team building

Summary 
-------

There are many ways you can reorganize and restructure your teams, but
remember --- renaming and changing where people sit will not solve all
your problems. Your architecture and organization should dictate how you
want to work, not the other way around. Remember, the goal is to be able
to deliver quickly, high quality products and be able to scale. Model on
how you want your teams to behave and the culture you want to promote.

Some questions you should ask yourself are:

-   Can your teams scale with growth? Think about different scenarios;
	what id your company needs to produce a new type of product? What if
	your company goes into a new market? What if your company buys
	another company?
-   Can you make sure each one of your features or departments gets the
	attention and development capacity they deserve?
-   Can you keep bureaucracy at a minimum (see Spotify for MVB --- it's
	a great concept)? This is important for scaling so designing,
	releasing and developing doesn't become painful and political.
-   Can you ensure fast planning and a clean release process?

Although this method is great and very idealistic, it too comes with its
difficulties.

For example, with so many 'micro' teams, it can become difficult to
ensure knowledge does get transfered, and the teams don't become siloed.
This for sure is needed if for example one squad needs to do some work
on another squads code base, and even on a product level. Everyone still
needs to be in sync and going towards the same strategic goal. 10 squads
going in their own direction isn't going to help anyone. This is why
vision is so important, which I will cover in a separate post.





Agile Iceberg
=============

<kbd>![](https://miro.medium.com/max/1412/1*eVr5ZdXg_FxHJ1ZsmI0Zyg.png)

The true deepness of the model can only be found beneath the surface of
what is visible for the observer above the surface.

**Above the water there's every aspect that is** visible for the
observer:

Methods, tools, roles, frameworks, practices,

**Below** the surface:

Values & Principles.\
More impactful the deeper the stuff below the surface is. The more
stable it the iceberg on the top.

**What's new?**

The feedback loop surrounding the iceberg: We can only be agile when we
take both parts of the iceberg into consideration and learn via feedback
and iterations, where to improve and to change in order to get a more
fulfilling, fun and purpose driven, learning environment aka being
agile.

**How can the model be useful?**

Since we have our own iceberg visualization we used it in several
workshops. With our participants we do simulations like the ["Ball Point
Game" by Boris
Gloger](https://www.borisgloger.com/wp-content/uploads/Publikationen/Tools/Ball_Point_Game.pdf) and
use the model to debrief the exercise. By questions like "What do you
think was responsible for your productivity increase?" and then classify
the answers within our iceberg model. Like this, we can differentiate
their experiences between beneath and above the surface and explain
Agile in a nutshell. Whether you use it to debrief a simulation or you
just explain it or find a completely different way to integrate it in
your work, just do it!

**Use it --- Check out the template**

Find the template  [here!](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1owLm-nxH-bVql-Q7dLl43-rzmfT9ZFjitNVQgwPEfmY/edit?usp=sharing) You can exchange the terms and text elements and individualize for your context!

<kbd>![](https://miro.medium.com/max/1500/1*hHePeztI8rpaPRqQBOnxmw.png)




Management Transformation
=========================

Transformation
--------------

### Manager

[As a manager, you are no longer able to tell the members of your team (often called a squad) what to do and how to do it. You were also told that the product manager is responsible for prioritizing activities and that improving operational processes falls under the oversight of the scrum master.]

<table>
	<colgroup>
		<col />
		<col />
	</colgroup>
	<tbody>
		<tr>
			<th colspan="2">Transitioning to the Role of Agile Manager</th>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<th>Former Role - Traditional Manager</th>
			<th>New Role - Agile Manager</th>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>
				<p>A generalist manager responsible for the following activities:</p>
				<ul>
					<li>Managing the members of their team - Business knowledge and/or technical expertise</li>
					<li>Process or Project Management</li>
				</ul>
			</td>
			<td>
				<p>A manager specialized in one (1) of the following areas of activity:</p>
				<ul>
					<li>People / talent management</li>
					<li>Product or business line management</li>
					<li>Project or process management</li>
				</ul>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>
				<br />
			</td>
			<td>
				<p>
					<strong>With unchanging responsibilities…</strong>
				</p>
				<ul>
					<li>Communicating the business’s vision and keeping everything aligned with the company’s values</li>
					<li>Removing obstacles that impair the team</li>
					<li>Defining the team’s business objectives</li>
				</ul>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>
				<br />
			</td>
			<td>
				<p>
					<strong>With changing responsibilities that need to be delegated to the team…</strong>
				</p>
				<ul>
					<li>Choosing tools and methods</li>
					<li>Hiring, integration (and firing)</li>
					<li>Performance reviews (individual and team)</li>
					<li>Skills development</li>
					<li>Budget management</li>
				</ul>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>
				<br />
			</td>
			<td>
				<p>
					<strong>And with new responsibilities to integrate…</strong>
				</p>
				<ul>
					<li>Implementing and supporting self-organization</li>
					<li>Coaching and mentoring in your new area of expertise</li>
					<li>Supporting the team’s continual development</li>
					<li>Creating a work environment that is conducive to motivation and performance</li>
					<li>Being a facilitator (not a supervisor)</li>
				</ul>
			</td>
		</tr>
	</tbody>
</table>

#### Different Roles of a Manager in a Traditional Business

1.  **Managing the members of their team**. One of the main
	responsibilities of a manager consists of selecting, hiring,
	evaluating, promoting, supporting and developing the members of
	their team.
2.  **Business knowledge and/or technical expertise**. Many managers are
	contributors who, over the course of their career, have developed
	technical expertise or important business knowledge for the
	organization. Having demonstrated their expertise and contribution
	to the organization, they spend a significant amount of time using
	their skills (technical or business) to resolve problems encountered
	by their team.
3.  **Process or project management**. In addition to their other
	responsibilities, managers generally spend a significant amount of
	time managing their team members' projects. In a traditional
	context, they are often responsible for determining which team
	member is assigned to which activity and are therefore responsible
	for monitoring the progress of the various aspects of the project.
	Depending on their expertise, they might also design the business
	processes used by their team members.

#### New Roles of a Manager in an Agile Business

While traditional managers contribute as generalists, in an agile
environment, managers must choose an area of specialization between
people management, product management, or process/project management.
Some of the manager's former responsibilities are transferred to the
self-organized team (see below), and the agile manager becomes a coach
for the members of their self-organized team. Therefore, the agile
manager helps their squad to acquire and develop new skills

##### People / Talent Management 

In an agile organization, the people manager does not directly supervise
the members of their self-organized team, as they are not involved in
their team's daily work.

Consequently, the responsibilities for hiring, integrating, reviewing
and developing the members of a self-organized team are often
transferred to the team itself. The new position of people manager is to
support the team members through the integration of their new
responsibilities, and through the development of the skills they need to
succeed.

The challenge many traditional managers face when transitioning to this
role is detaching themselves from their involvement in the team's daily
activities and instead focusing on the development of skills for each of
the individual team members and of the squad as a whole.

##### Product or Business Line Management

In an agile organization, technical expertise (architecture,
technological orientation, etc.) is generally repatriated to members of
the self-organized team. This expertise is distributed to the team
members or assigned to a specialist.

In parallel, the organization's business-related expertise---products or
services (financial management, business rules, product portfolio
management, etc.)---is centralized under the position of  [product
owner](https://www.agilealliance.org/glossary/product-owner),
who ensures the evolution of the product (or service).

The traditional manager who opts for a product-based (or service-based)
specialization must develop market knowledge, strategic skills, and
product lifecycle knowledge in order to optimize the use of the
resources made available to them.

The manager therefore sets the priorities for the self-organized team.
As product owners become responsible for profitability management, they
need to develop business unit management skills and develop their
understanding of the needs of their market.

One of the greatest difficulties faced by traditional managers in this
new position is relinquishing the need to directly control the people
who work for them. They must evolve from a micromanagement role to the
daily management of a business line.

##### Project or Process Management 

Organizational agility leads to an increase in project mode operations.
Consequently, the need for project management expertise increases. This
need for expertise is an opportunity for traditional managers.

Thus, in an agile environment, one of the roles which the traditional
manager can take on is that of project (or process) manager, or  [scrum
master](https://www.agilealliance.org/glossary/scrum-master/).

This role revolves around the planning and organization of tasks that
must be carried out by the self-organized team, and around the support
and development of a healthy team dynamic. The project manager/scrum
master becomes an agile project management process expert. They support
the self-organized team by providing a framework that enables them to
attain their goals.

In sum, the role of traditional manager---the person who leads a team
(hiring, integrating, performance reviews, skills development, career
development, salary evaluation, etc.), who is a "job" expert (technical
or business domain knowledge), and who manages projects (assigning tasks
and monitoring the progress of employees)---evolves to one of the areas
of people, product, or project specialization in an agile organization.

The transition to a specialization in agile project management can bring
some challenges for traditional managers. They have to evolve from a "
[command-and-control](http://stephenjgill.typepad.com/performance_improvement_b/2010/05/commandandcontrol-leadership-vs-peoplecentered-leadership.html)"
type management mode to a role of influencer or " [servant
leader](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Servant_leadership)"
who is there to help the self-organized team.



Responsibilities that Do not Change
-----------------------------------

Assuming the role of traditional generalist manager disappears with the
implementation of self-organizing teams, many responsibilities do
change. However, regardless of the position of manager (people, product,
or project), some responsibilities remain unchanged.

-   **Communicating the business's vision and keeping everything aligned
	with the company's values.** In their new role, the agile manager
	continues to ensure that the self-organized team's work aligns with
	the vision and values of the company. The other managers working
	alongside the agile manager ensure that the team continues to
	function within these parameters.
-   **Removing obstacles that impair the team.** As agile managers are
	there to support self-organizing teams, they still bear the
	responsibility of removing obstacles that may prevent the team from
	completing their goals.
-   **Defining the team's business objectives.** We have already
	established that the difference between a self-organizing team and a
	self-managed team is that an external manager defines the objectives
	of the latter. In this sense, managers supporting self-organized
	teams must continue to define the people objectives (skills
	development), product objectives (content, schedules and budget),
	and the (agile) process objectives.

Responsibilities Must or Should Specifically Be Transferred to the Self-Organizing Team
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Depending on how mature the team is, the following areas of
responsibility may be entirely transferred to the self-organizing team.
A game of  [delegation
poker](https://management30.com/product/delegation-poker/) may
help determine the appropriate level of delegation for each area of
responsibility.

-   **Choosing tools and methods.** Choosing tools and methods is often
	one of the first elements transferred to the self-organizing team.
	As long as objectives are clearly defined, the team is left to
	establish the best methods of achieving their objectives and
	providing the tools necessary to do so.
-   **Hiring, integration (and firing).** Many of the activities linked
	to people management can be transferred to the self-organized team.
	With training and the necessary support, team members are usually
	able to take over the tasks linked to the formation of their team.
-   **Performance reviews (individual and team).** Given that agile
	managers are no longer involved in their team's daily activities,
	individual performance reviews can now become the team's
	responsibility. By implementing agile performance review methods,
	the team can develop the mechanisms needed to improve its
	performance.
-   **Skills development.** Like performance management, skills
	development is transferred to the team members. They are in the best
	position to determine the skills that are lacking within the team
	and those that need to be improved to reach greater levels of
	performance and efficiency.
-   **Budget management.** In a self-organized team with a pre-defined
	sandbox, management of the operating budget can be delegated to the
	team. However, setting the operating budget is normally the
	responsibility of the product owner.

New Skills for Agile Manager
----------------------------

Within the context of organizational agility, people managers, product
managers, and project managers who support self-organizing teams take
charge of or contribute to these key skills:

-   **Implementing and supporting self-organization.** Very few
	employees have experienced being part of a self-organized team in a
	professional context. Consequently, acquiring the necessary skills
	to support the team in the effective implementation of
	self-organization is a specific skill. In this sense, agile managers
	have the opportunity to develop an expertise that is in demand in
	organizations taking the plunge towards agility in all their
	operations.
-   **Coaching and mentoring in their area of expertise
	(specialization).** Managers of self-organizing teams must develop
	coaching skills to evolve from manager-expert to manager-coach (or 
	[servant
	leader](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Servant_leadership)).
	It is unrealistic to think that the members of a self-organizing
	team have, from the moment the team is formed, the knowledge and
	skills necessary to be autonomous and effective. Consequently,
	traditional managers that have developed certain skills throughout
	the course of their careers (people management, product management,
	or project management) become coaches and mentors for the
	self-organizing team. They transmit their knowledge and share their
	expertise to help squads become autonomous and efficient.
-   **Supporting the team's continual development.** Yes, project
	managers/scrum masters directly support teams through their
	continued improvement, yet, agile managers can also have a positive
	impact on self-organizing teams. Beyond iteration retrospectives,
	agile managers contribute to the company's improved operations by
	supporting the integration of continuous improvement in all areas of
	activity.
-   **Creating a work environment that is conducive to motivation and
	performance.** Work environments significantly influence the
	performance of team members. Agile managers therefore must create an
	agile culture that fosters motivation and performance within their
	self-organized team.
-   **Being a facilitator (not a supervisor).** Making suggestions about
	how to overcome obstacles without imposing decisions. Supporting the
	squad when it faces obstacles and needs help.

<table>
	<colgroup>
		<col />
		<col />
	</colgroup>
	<tbody>
		<tr>
			<th colspan="2">New Skills Agile Manager Needs to Incorporate</th>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<th>Agile Manager do this</th>
			<th>Not this</th>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>
				Are there to help their team and promote collaboration
			</td>
			<td>
				Manager and control their team
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>
				Listen and use powerful questions
			</td>
			<td>
				Tell their team what to do and/pr how to do it
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>
				Act as a coach and mentor
			</td>
			<td>Act as an expert</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>Facilitate their team and treat its members as competent, autonomous adults</td>
			<td>Put themselves at the centre of the team's success</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>Trust their team and treat its members as competent, autonomous adults</td>
			<td>Control their team and treat its members as (Incompetent, dependent) &quot;children&quot;</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>See their roles as a complement to the role of the team members</td>
			<td>See their roles as more important than the role of the team members</td>
		</tr>
	</tbody>
</table>

Why Care about Agile
--------------------

### Optimizing for flow Rather than resource utilization

This change is counterintuitive for most of us. Work is no longer
assigned, it is prepared and made available to be pulled by individuals
or teams based on their capacity and competence. This comes across as a
radical shift in mindset that middle management needs to live, and upper
management needs to understand. There is no longer direct control over
who does what, or if they're doing anything at all.  [ Are you ready to
trust that people will actually  *choose *to do useful work?
]{style="color: rgb(0,128,0);"}

### Limiting work in progress

To achieve flow, we need to do less stuff. Limiting work in progress has
moderate effect if nothing changes upstream. You need to limit the
number of initiatives or projects as well. This means you need a
different approach to portfolio management. Management must understand
why, and help share this understanding with all stakeholders.

### Embracing uncertainty

An agile team isn't stoked about estimates, deadlines or detailed
roadmaps. They still plan and analyze, but prefer to do small scale
tests and experiments to prove or disprove a theory. If unexpected
things happen during implementation, we see this as a valuable learning
experience instead of a threat. Adjusting course based on things we
learn during our journey, will help us build a better product.

The trade off is that at the beginning we know very little. Upfront
information about exact cost or delivery date is not available. This has
consequences above the team level. As a manager, it is difficult to see
uncertainty as a good thing.  [However, every decision made and date
promised, means less room to navigate in the future. To be agile means
to commit at the latest possible moment.]{style="color: rgb(0,128,0);"}

>     Every decision made and date promised, means less room to navigate in the future.

### Frequent delivery

Instead of accepting large bodies of work with a fixed delivery date,
agile teams prefer to deliver small, frequent changes. «Save early, save
often.» If you screw up (and you will), going back isn't too hard (or
humiliating).

That big change you requested will be delivered in increments. The team
roll their eyes at the detailed specification you spent days writing,
but insist that you are available for questions and discussions
throughout. The customer may get incomplete features that provide some
value, but not all the functionality she requested. We mark some
features as  *Beta*, others are only available to select customers until
they have been battle tested.

This requires good relations and good information flow between you and
your customers. To deliver incomplete stuff enables an opportunity for
feedback, and subsequently better products. Both customers and
management needs help understanding this.

### Permanent teams

Agile developers prefer to work in permanent (or at least semi
permanent) teams, and build technical and domain understanding over
time. The teams are often not just technical, but rather focused around
a product or service. The team include many if not all required roles.
This is difficult in a project organization that fund and staff every
effort individually. The organization should instead fund the permanent
capability to build products.

>     Instead of funding projects, you should fund the permanent capability to build products.

We've established that the model for funding and budgeting needs to
change. Needless to say, the team can't carry out this change alone, so
again management needs to get involved.

This shift also leads to an interesting effect during prioritization and
triage. The discussions are no longer about funding and cost, but about
value and cost of delay.  [How long are we willing to let this
initiative block our development pipeline? What is the consequence of
delaying our other options during this time, as opposed to delaying this
option? Can we do the most important part of this now, and the rest
later (if we still want to)?]{style="color: rgb(0,128,0);"}

### Transparency

Traditional companies are usually a bunch of silos with different goals
and objectives. Some even do internal invoicing (don't get me started).
Information is often seen as a valuable commodity used for politics and
rarely openly available.

An agile team value transparency and sharing above all. When everyone
involved share the same view of the world, we spend less time on
misunderstandings and wasted efforts. The transparent, inquisitive
nature and brutal honesty of a mature agile team can be uncomfortable
for managers. Suddenly the reply is  *«Why»* or even  *«No»* instead of 
*«Yes, sir».* The project status is  *«We are drowning in technical debt
and our speed is approaching zero»* instead of  *«Green»*. The brutal
reality that middle management used to cover up, is suddenly available
to everyone including the CEO.

>     The brutal reality that middle management used to cover up, is suddenly available to everyone including the CEO.



Key Takeaways
=============

-   There are things that technology managers need to start doing as
	agile leaders like creating space for co-location and letting teams
	self-organize. They need to let teams think for themselves.
-   Managers need to adopt their style to the maturity of the agile
	team. Asking the right questions is important.
-   Company policies and performance measures for managers can cause
	behaviors that conflict with agile. Managers also need to let teams
	think for themselves. Managers need to create an ecosystem where
	teams can thrive.
-   There are some dates that need to be met and managers should support
	teams to meet those dates by adjusting scope or team size.
-   The agile leader mindset is critical. Managers need to focus on
	changing the organization to create an environment so that teams can
	thrive and become productive.
-   Big bang agile transformation approaches are more difficult than a
	slower, staged, team by team transition. Rolling out two or three
	teams per quarter helps build success and momentum.
-   Scrum provides a mirror of the organization and all the current
	problems become visible.
-   It can take six months to ramp-up a new team and get them to steady
	state.
-   Individual performance goals need to be revised in agile to foster
	more of a team focus; incentives need to be aligned with helping
	team mates vs. individual performance and heroics.
-   Training for technology managers is critical if they are to succeed
	as agile leaders. Leaders need to understand the "why" behind agile
	ways of working. Agile Coaches should push for immersion training
	for leaders.
-   Agile teams need to have a strong, transparent relationship with the
	business to create trust.



###### References

-   [Noteworthy Journal Block - Im a manager why should i care about agile software development](https://blog.usejournal.com/im-a-manager-why-should-i-care-about-agile-software-development-1a318a056d20)
-   [Vitality Chicago - how technology managers can succeed as agile leaders](https://vitalitychicago.com/blog/how-technology-managers-can-succeed-as-agile-leaders/)
-   [Agile42 - Enterprise Transition Framework](https://www.agile42.com/en/all-agile/etf/)
-   [Agile42 - Agile strategy map](https://www.agile42.com/en/all-agile/agile-strategy-map/)
-   [Agile42 - Agile strategy map background](https://www.agile42.com/en/all-agile/agile-strategy-map/background/)
-   [Cast Software - Agile Transformation Roadmap](https://www.castsoftware.com/research-labs/agile-transformation-roadmap)
-   [Deloitte - Agile Transformation Approach.pdf](https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/global/Documents/About-Deloitte/gx-about-deloitte-agile-deloitte-agile-transformation-approach.pdf)
-   [Scrum Alliance - Global Scrum Gatherings 2018 Minneapolis Presentations \| Steps to a Successsful Enterprise Agile Transformation.pdf](https://www.scrumalliance.org/ScrumRedesignDEVSite/media/ScrumAllianceMedia/Global%20Scrum%20Gatherings/2018%20Minneapolis/Presentations/Mike-Hall-10-Steps-to-a-Successsful-Enterprise-Agile-Transformation-Global-Scrum-2018_1.pdf)
-   [Medium -  Agile team organisation squads chapters tribes and guilds](https://medium.com/@achardypm/agile-team-organisation-squads-chapters-tribes-and-guilds-80932ace0fdc)
-   [Medium - Tools for agile transformations agile iterative ](https://medium.com/@rm_26250/tools-for-agile-transformations-agile-iterative-iceberg-d1c2fff77479)
-   [Audacium - Transitioning to the role of agile manager what does it involve](https://audacium.com/en/transitioning-to-the-role-of-agile-manager-what-does-it-involve/)
-   [Berteig - Agile tool culture](https://berteig.com/how-to-apply-agile/agile-tool-culture/)
-   [Benlinders - the strengths of agile teams](https://www.benlinders.com/2020/the-strengths-of-agile-teams/)

 
###### Attachments: 

-   [Agile42 Enterprise Transition Poster.pdf](attachments/451819467/451819493.pdf) 
-   [Deloitte Agile Transformation-approach.pdf](attachments/451819467/451819495.pdf)
-   [Scrum Alliance Steps to a Successsful Enterprise Agile Transformation.pdf](attachments/451819467/451819496.pdf)
	