###### [Home](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/blob/master/README.md) | [Leadership](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/tree/master/Leadership/README.md) |
------------

# Information Technology : \_Confident or Arrogant


## Drop names out of context

The name-dropper is a character who frequents many local Chamber of
Commerce mixers. Name-droppers are a dime a dozen. Completely
unsolicited, they will jabber endlessly about who they know, who they
met and who they pal around with. As a journalist, I interview many
great business leaders, one of whom
was [Starbucks](https://www.theladders.com/company/starbucks-jobs) CEO
Howard Schultz. Bringing up his name in a presentation about leadership
is appropriate; talking about Schultz with a barista at my local
Starbucks is arrogant.

## Avoid eye contact

Arrogant people could care less about others. They’re only interested in
themselves. The arrogant person will constantly be looking past you for
someone else to talk to — someone they think will benefit them more than
you. Confident leaders look you in the eye and make you feel as though
you’re the most important person in the room.

## Arrive consistently late to meetings … and don’t apologize

Arrogant people think their time is more important than anybody else’s.
Being late means nothing to them. Confident leaders are timely and quick
to apologize when they’re off schedule.

## Use condescending phrases and put-downs

Some well-known business leaders have been known to put down others with
phrases like “that’s stupid” or “you’re a bozo.” These particular
leaders are supremely confident, of course, but they’ve crossed the line
into arrogance. I worked for one famous broadcast executive who
routinely demeaned his employees and colleagues. Before long there was a
massive brain drain from his department. He was bright; ambitious; and
yes, confident. But his arrogance turned so many people off that he lost
the loyalty of his team (and ultimately his position).

## Strut or swagger when you walk into a room

The best way to describe arrogant body language is “dominating.”
Examples include pointing a finger at someone’s chest, hands on hips or
waving someone off with a flick of the finger. Confidence is open and
less intimidating.

## Interrupt conversations … frequently

Since arrogant people are only concerned about themselves, they’re not
really listening to you. Not only are they always on the lookout for
someone else to talk to, they interrupt the conversation frequently.

## Have an answer for everything

Psychologists say that arrogance is a compensation for insecurities and
weaknesses. An arrogant person will rarely say, “I don’t know the
answer, but I’ll find out.” Confident people admit mistakes and learn
something from those experiences.

## Always one-up the other person

The other day I was speaking to someone who has a reputation for
arrogance, and I noticed a common theme in his conversation with me — he
always tried to one-up everything I said. For example, when the
conversation turned to a documentary that I had recently seen on sharks,
this man said, “That’s nothing, I swim with sharks.” This trait in
arrogant people is so common that the famous Dilbert cartoon strip has a
recurring character named “Topper.” Confident people don’t feel the need
to brag. Their accomplishments do it for them.

## Blast competitors

Arrogant people can’t see the strengths in their competitors, and if
they do, they seek to minimize those competitors by bad-mouthing them.
This simply makes the arrogant person look even smaller. I recently
overheard a woman talking to a recruiter and saying vicious things about
her former company as well as other companies in the industry. The
recruiter listened patiently. When the woman left, I leaned over and
asked the recruiter what he thought. He simply rolled his eyes. Take the
high road so you don’t get the eye roll.

## Blame someone else

Arrogant people can’t ‘fess up to their own mistakes. Watch “America’s
Next Top Model” with Tyra Banks. The most arrogant young wannabes are
the ones who blame others for not taking a good photograph — it’s either
the fault of the photographer or the makeup artist. Needless to say,
they don’t last long, even in an industry that has more than its share
of divas.

  

  

  

  

  

  
References

  - [The ladders - 10-ways-tell-confident-arrogant](https://www.theladders.com/career-advice/10-ways-tell-confident-arrogant)

