###### [Home](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/blob/master/README.md) | [Leadership](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/tree/master/Leadership/README.md) |
------------


# Information Technology : Anti-Manager


## Takes credit for others’ work

“A good manager always takes responsibility for the performance of their
team and won’t throw any of their team members “under the bus” while
still providing the team members with all the praise in public, even for
ideas that the manager would’ve come up with themselves. A bad manager
is the opposite. They take all the credit and blame their employees for
the failures, which obliterates trust and leads to the team starting to
also cover for themselves as opposed to working for the best of the
company.”

``` 
- Jesse Nieminen, Co-Founder of Viima
            
```

“There’s nothing worse than working for a manager that’s willing and
happy to claim any big wins the team achieves, but deflects
responsibility when times are tough and losses come around. Team wins
and losses should be shared together, with management leading the way to
ensure wins are multiplied and losses minimized.”

``` 
- Kris Hughes, Senior Content Marketing Manager at ProjectManager.com
            
```

## Doesn’t show appreciation or give recognition to employees

“We all like to be told we’ve done a great job, and some managers may
overlook that when leading a team. You should always let people know
when they’re doing a good job, it’s extremely motivating and shows you
respect them professionally.”

``` 
- Matt Reaney, Founder of Big Cloud
            
```

“They see you, their employee, as simply a set of hands and feet paid to
get a job done. They don’t ask about you personally, because they don’t
care. If it doesn’t have to do with getting the job done, they don’t
care.”

``` 
- Michael Wilkinson, CMF, CPF, Founder and Managing Director of Leadership Strategies, Inc. and Author of “The Secrets of Facilitation”
            
```

“A manager is the one leading their team and will also be the one that
knows when to give credit where credit is due. If they cannot appreciate
instances where their team exceeds their expectations, it will be a
source of demotivation. This will also worsen if the manager does not
give credit to their team while also taking all the credit for
themselves.”

``` 
- Sean Si, CEO and Founder of SEO Hacker, Qeryz, Sigil and Workplay
            
```

## Unable to trust (control freak)

“There are managers that are unable to give projects completely to their
juniors. The junior will do the work, but everything needs to be
funneled through to the manager for approval – which is okay on some
things, but when a manager refuses to let anything go without approval,
it results in bottlenecks. You’ll have juniors sitting around waiting
for their manager to approve their work, so there’s a huge loss of
productivity. Managers need to be able to trust the people they employ
to do their work correctly.”

``` 
- Michael Sunderland, Managing Director at Full Stack Talent
            
```

“Similar to micromanagement, the untrusting manager wants the employee
to get the work done, but is excessive in checking timing and details.
They may feel that employees who are very successful are a threat, and
so place greater emphasis in trying to catch them doing the wrong
thing.”

``` 
- Richard Pummell, Human Resources Lead at DevelopIntelligence
            
```

## Plays favorites

“Managers that pick out certain team members as their favorites are…bad
news. Often there are some members of the team that are more similar in
terms of culture, values or even work ethic, so it’s easy for managers
to relate more easily to these people. However, when this results in
them promoting their work over others, giving more weight to their
opinions, or giving more assistance, it crosses the line. Other team
members are quick to notice, and can easily become disengaged as a
result.”

``` 
- Fiona Adler, Founder of Actioned.com
            
```

“It can be hard to be recognised in the world of work, but even more so
if your manager favors certain members of the team.

Staff can feel really unmotivated if they have a manager with favorites;
it means their hard work goes unnoticed. Showing favoritism towards
specific employees also leads other members of the team to feel
frustrated with the company dynamic when it comes to completing
deadlines and making complaints about those certain members of staff.”

``` 
- Chris Wain, Sales Director for Africa Travel
            
```

## Doesn’t provide clear or realistic direction

“A bad manager is one who does not clearly define for employees their
responsibilities. This can lead to confusion among team members and work
not getting done if no one understands that the tasks are their
responsibility.”

``` 
- Nate Masterson, CEO of Maple Holistics
            
```

“\[One thing you’ll find from bad managers is\] setting unrealistic
expectations with no guidance. There could be a lack of teamwork that is
needed in order to complete a project. It is important for managers to
know the difference between overworking their employees and challenging
them. It is important for employees to be resourceful and learn their
own way through a project, but it is also vital to show them the vital
resources.”

``` 
- Jacob Dayan, Esq., CEO and Co-founder of Community Tax
            
```

## Is unavailable or avoids tough conversations

“As a business owner, your door should always be figuratively and
literally open to employees. It’s up to you to foster a collaborative
environment, where team members feel comfortable approaching you with
questions, concerns, new ideas, and even criticism. If you set a tone of
being too busy or too important for employees, you’ll likely miss out on
the valuable insight they can offer.”

``` 
- David Scarola, Vice President of The Alternative Board
            
```

“Dealing with conflict is part of the job description for managers—in
fact, a study from the American Management Association found that 24% of
a manager’s day is spent managing conflict. It’s a challenging task that
demands emotional intelligence along with an arsenal of conflict
resolution techniques—and a manager simply isn’t doing their job if they
shy away from conflict management responsibilities.”

``` 
- Ben Aston, Founder of The Digital Project Manager
            
```

## Lack of empathy or compassion (low emotional intelligence)

“Effective leadership at any level requires the ability to recognize and
control one’s own emotions. It also requires the ability to show
empathy, recognize and influence the emotions of others. A poor manager
lacks this skill.”

``` 
- Cynthia Corsetti, CPCC, SPHR, Executive Leadership Coach at Cynthia Corsetti Coaching, LLC
            
```

“Another quality of a bad manager is not caring if their employees are
overworked. An employee’s mental health is crucial to the employee’s
life as well as their productivity at work, and a boss who is not in
tune with what their employees are experiencing does not value the needs
of their employees.”

``` 
- Nate Masterson, CEO of Maple Holistics
            
```

“When a manager fails to make a concerted effort to understand the needs
and desires of their employees, and how they can help them reach both
individual and group goals, morale suffers. This causes lowered
productivity and a higher turnover rate.”

``` 
- Kieran Canisius, CEO & Co-Founder of Seuss Recruiting, Seuss Consulting, and 
            Zocket
            
```

## Unable to listen and respond to feedback (poor listener)

“This is probably the most damaging characteristic that a manager can
have. They won’t listen to a person speaking and therefore they never
truly get to the route of the issue. Instead, the manager hears a few
words and begins to interrupt with a solution, which may not even be the
right solution because they didn’t truly listen to the problem. The
manager with poor listening skills has no chance of having a productive
and effective team.”

``` 
- Cynthia Corsetti, CPCC, SPHR, Executive Leadership Coach at Cynthia Corsetti Coaching, LLC
            
```

“The number one thing that defines a bad manager for me is an inability
to listen and respond to feedback from staff. Individual team members
are always a rich source of information – they could hear real-life
feedback from customers, for example, or have insights into where
processes could be refined. A manager who’s too arrogant to realise the
value of this information not only misses out on opportunities to
improve things; They also alienate the staff by failing to listen. As a
consultant who’s zipped around numerous companies for over a decade,
I’ve encountered a great many managers like this.”

``` 
- Ben Taylor, Founder of HomeWorkingClub
            
```

“\[With bad managers…\] One-way communication is rampant. In any meeting
they lead, their voice dominates the air waves. They don’t care what you
think, they don’t ask questions, and when you give input, their focus is
explaining why you are wrong.”

``` 
- Michael Wilkinson, CMF, CPF, Founder and Managing Director of Leadership Strategies, Inc. and Author of “The Secrets of Facilitation”
            
```

“Bad managers speak more than they listen. When you’re the loudest voice
in the room, it’s easy to forget that you hired a bunch of smart people
who are more qualified to do their jobs than you are. Managers sometimes
consider employee silence to be an indicator of agreement or an absence
of ideas. However, employee silence is more likely due to feeling
uncomfortable speaking. Perhaps they don’t want to interrupt a manager
who leaves little room for others to speak, or they think their idea
will go over poorly, or they don’t want to point out flaws in a
manager’s plan.”

``` 
- Dave Lane, CEO of Inventiv
            
```

## Doesn’t lead by example

“I’m sure everyone’s seen a manager who talks to their employees about
the times being tough and everyone having to work longer hours for the
same pay, then leaving the office early to play golf. While hypocrisy
often isn’t this obvious, it’s a common problem with far-reaching
consequences for the morale and performance of the team, as well as the
credibility of the manager. A manager always leads by example, whether
they want it or not.”

``` 
- Jesse Nieminen, Co-Founder of Viima
            
```

“Pitching in with the ‘grunt’ work, being one of the team and showing up
is so important for leading others. No one wants to work for someone who
never shows up, doesn’t do work themselves or acts superior. Be someone
they can follow in the right path\!”

``` 
- Matt Reaney, Founder of Big Cloud
            
```

“\[Also known as a\] “do as I say, not as I do” mentality. As an
employer, all eyes are on you, which means, you need to be your model
employee. You can’t expect your employees to be chipper, if you’re
bringing in a bad attitude every day. You also can’t expect your
employees to conquer challenges, that you don’t know how to conquer
yourself. Knowing the ins and outs of your industry is paramount to good
leadership, as is setting the positive tone for company culture.”

``` 
-David Scarola, Vice President of The Alternative Board
            
```

“\[Similar to those who micromanage their team), managers who require
excellence from their team members, but do not produce excellent results
in their own daily work – leading by example – are sure to fail in time,
because they simply will not earn respect from their team.”

``` 
- Kris Hughes, Senior Content Marketing Manager at ProjectManager.com
            
```


Lacks humility or self-awareness


“I believe lack of humility is a trait of a bad manager because, even
though they are in a position of leadership, managers don’t have all the
answers. If they pretend like they do (and I have seen many
managers/leaders do this), then they end up wasting time and valuable
resources. A good manager realizes they can’t accomplish everything on
their own and that’s when they’re able to leverage the strengths of
their team.”

``` 
- Tyler Hanna, CEO and Co-Founder of 8-bit Rex
            
```

“\[Some bad managers\] have such low self-awareness that they blame
others for their own failings. They don’t see how their action and
inaction contribute significantly to the problems they have.”

``` 
- Michael Wilkinson, CMF, CPF, Founder and Managing Director of Leadership Strategies, Inc. and Author of “The Secrets of Facilitation”
            
```

## Manages with fear, not fairness

“The manager \[who leads with fear\] wants employees to feel they are
lucky to have a job, and whenever a request is made it includes a tacit
threat that if the request isn’t delivered, there will be ramifications
down the road. This can also include the manager who selects favorites
and gives others the cold shoulder – and will frequently change how they
treat an individual employee. Employees never know where they stand, and
generally dislike any interactions with the manager.”

``` 
- Richard Pummell, Human Resources Lead at DevelopIntelligence
            
```

“The old-style “my way or the highway” mindset of management has no
place in modern society, but there are still plenty of managers out
there that try to lead this way. While a fear-based style might get some
short-term results, the long-term negative impact will always be more
substantial. Servant leadership is the only way to drive consistent
results in a business world now that is as complex and dynamic as it’s
ever been.”

``` 
 
- Kris Hughes, Senior Content Marketing Manager at ProjectManager.com
            
```

## Is complacent about poor performing or toxic team members

“Keeping a bad teammate on the team is poor decision. It’s not doing any
service to the weak team member and it’s not fair to all the other
teammates. It is the most dangerous and most common sign of a weak
manager by suffering a poor performing team member and not cutting them
loose before it’s too late.”

``` 
- Zach Hendrix Co-Founder of GreenPal
            
```

## Doesn’t follow through or recognize their own responsibilities

“One of the main qualities I see in a bad manager is that they think
they get more freedom, when in fact they actually get more work. I’ve
seen it time and time again, someone becomes a manager and thinks they
don’t have to follow all the rules or do the small duties it takes to
maintain a team. In short, they get lazy, and there’s no quicker way to
get your team to quit on you than by being egotistical and entitled.”

``` 
- Nick Glassett, Founder of OriginLeadership.com
            
```

“Countless managers receive requests, questions, concerns etc. from
their team and either 1) never respond, or 2) respond and then fail to
follow through. This can be very demotivating for team members and sets
the tone for a company culture of dropping the ball. Great managers are
so organized, their team knows they can count on them to follow up.”

``` 
- Kevin Armstrong, Owner of The Alternative Board – Vancouver
            
```

“This person is the opposite extreme \[of a micromanager\]. They think
that they can get everyone working at capacity with just the very
occasional bit of guidance. They often arrive late, take long lunches,
and leave early on a regular basis. They overvalue the contribution of
their strategic thinking and are quick to take credit for their team
members’ work. Pretty soon, people resent these types of managers.”

``` 
- Fiona Adler, Founder of  Actioned.com
            
```

## Doesn’t live up to workplace values

“Bad managers will demonstrate inconsistencies in the values of the
company. They might advertise the principles as part of the mission
statement, but their day-to-day actions say otherwise. And of course:
Actions speak louder than words. Research shows, inconsistencies in
values is recipe for employee burnout.”

``` 
- Nicholas Hobson, Workplace Psychologist and Co-Founder of PsychologyCompass.com
            
```

## Aligning downward

New managers often align downward because it’s the path of least
resistance. Downward alignment happens when leaders support, collude and
collaborate with subordinates instead of aligning with executive
strategy. For example, there’s pressure from the C-suite to institute a
new policy and the manager knows their employees won’t agree. Therefore,
they tell their employees something like, “I don’t agree with this
decision but …” Downward alignment also sneaks up slowly and happens
when the leader needs support or a sounding board.

**Here’s why:**  It’s tempting to vent to a subordinate who used to be a
peer and a friend. The new leader forgets that the subordinate is also
good friends with other employees. But, sharing private information with
subordinates instigates gossip and hearsay, often resulting in
departmental drama or even  [unwanted
turnover.](https://www.gallup.com/workplace/247391/fixable-problem-costs-businesses-trillion.aspx) (Does
it really take a white paper or statistics from Gallup to understand
that a leader who instigates gossip is costly to the organization?)

**What to do:** Provide mentors for new supervisors. Explain the dangers
of downward alignment and help them identify examples of downward
alignment. Teach new managers to bring their concerns up the chain
instead of downward.

## Avoiding difficult conversations

When a long-term employee is 
[surprised](https://www.forbes.com/sites/lizryan/2016/06/07/my-performance-review-was-outstanding-and-then-i-got-fired/#1c8645b7190a) after
being fired, it usually because someone avoided initiating  [difficult
conversations](https://www.lynda.com/Leadership-Management-tutorials/Having-Difficult-Conversations/746303-2.md).
One of the biggest pitfalls of a new leader is their inability to
initiate difficult performance conversations.

**Here’s why:** Managers don’t want to look incompetent to their boss.
Where their employees are concerned, they want to be seen as being a “
[nice
leader](https://www.smartbrief.com/original/2019/06/how-nice-leaders-create-team-drama).”
Where their execs are concerned, these leaders don’t want to send up any
red flags that there are problems in their department. Finally, many
leaders simply don’t have the leadership development they need to take
initiative. Leaders who avoid set the stage for a discrimination or 
[retaliation](https://corporate.findlaw.com/human-resources/retaliation-lawsuits-can-bring-surprising-results.md) suit
in the future.

According to Ashley Norgard, attorney with Kutak Rock, “Usually
employment litigation is the result of leaders who waited too long to
have necessary conversations. In many cases, I see a combination of poor
performance management, ignorance of legal requirements and lack of
leadership, but it usually all feeds back to lack of timely
communication about performance issues.”

**What to do: **Provide your new leaders with leadership development so
that they know how to take initiative in addressing complaints and
handing people problems. Provide them with a good employee handbook and
an orientation from the company attorney who can help them realize the
role they play in protecting the company from unnecessary risk.

## Shooting from the hip

The opposite of the avoiding leader is the leader who shoots from the
hip. This leader is entrepreneurial and thrives on change. Although this
type of leader takes action, they lack strategic thinking and often
don’t consider the long-term effects of their decision-making. For
example, the leader changes the work schedule without warning or decides
to upgrade or downgrade titles without considering the culture, politics
or possible turf wars that might erupt.

**Here’s why: **The leader is only looking at the solution from one
point of view. They move parts and pieces around on their chessboard
without considering how one move affects future moves.

**What to do:** Put some checks and balances in place for how much
leeway you give to new or inexperienced leaders. Teach new leaders how
to put contingent plans into place and how to run pilot programs so that
there’s room to course-correct misjudgments.

## Misplaced identity

All the above problems boil down to identity. No matter how stellar an
employee’s performance, there’s a big identity gap between the role of
employee and role of leader. The telltale signs of a leader who has not
made this identity shift include micromanaging, having trouble
delegating and feeling threatened by someone else’s brilliance. In
short, they have not made the necessary identity shift.

**Here’s why:** When an employee suddenly becomes a leader, he or she
still identifies with being an employee. Often new leaders are more
attached to doing the job than to getting the job done through others.

**What to do:** Before someone is promoted to a management, supervisory,
or leadership role, start six months to one year out creating a bridge
strategy. The bridge strategy can include many facets: shadowing,
training on specific functions of management, taking courses or getting
certifications. What happens in the process is the thinking shifts from
“me” to “we” and from job to organization.

## Strategic codependency

Your boss pretends not to see you, acknowledge your work, or refuses to
listen to your feedback. Meanwhile, they might offer isolated
compliments and praise that seems out of place or uncharacteristically
generous. By creating an environment where direct reports compete with
peers for praise or opportunities to build their trust, they cement an
unequal power dynamic, as well as mistrust among the team.

## Countering and diverting

When they feel challenged, gaslighting bosses double-down with circular
conversations, counterattacks, or arguments that deviate from the points
at hand. The author of  [Power: Surviving and Thriving After
Narcissistic
Abuse](https://www.amazon.com/POWER-Surviving-Narcissistic-Collection-Narcissism/dp/1945796324),
Shahida Arabi, captures the outcome of this tactic perfectly: “They do
this in order to discredit, confuse and frustrate you, distract you from
the main problem and make you feel guilty for being a human being with
actual thoughts and feelings that might differ from their own. In their
eyes, you are the problem if you happen to exist.”

## Trivializing

If your boss makes your needs or your experiences seem insignificant to
theirs or the organization’s at large, if you bring up concerns and your
boss suggests you’re too emotional, making a big deal out of nothing, or
that you should just get with the program, your boss is actively
trivializing your agency in the organization. They’re also calling your
perception of reality into question by making you doubt whether your
inherent response to these behaviors is appropriate while taking no time
to reflect on theirs.

## Punitive punishments

If you try to disrupt the power balance by presenting any concerns
within your workplace under a gaslighting boss, you may also experience
judgment or punitive punishment like your boss sabotaging your work. At
one particular organization I was employed at, I disagreed with the
publisher on how my name should be written in the byline. The byline on
the article I had written was effectively removed as a direct result of
my insubordination over this issue. This was when I knew I was not at a
typical organization and that it was time to move on.

## Forgetting/denial

Your boss claims to have forgotten conversations as they occurred or
denies promises made. For example, if a boss promised a raise or
compensation following a project or sale you completed but then insists
the conversation never happened.

These are just a short list of what someone under a gaslighting boss
might endure. In order to avoid falling into these workplace pitfalls
and maintain healthy boundaries, consider the following tips on how to
productively manage these situations:

  - Record everything in writing and have witnesses when possible. Try
    keeping a record of your conversations via email and avoid making
    spoken agreements that can’t be corroborated with documentation.
    This makes it harder for gaslighters to question your experiences
    and you’ll have a reference point if they try. Make sure to copy
    team members on emails whenever possible and communicate facts or
    necessary information as clearly as possible.
  - Lean on your tribe. When a boss is making you question your sense of
    reality, feedback from people you know and trust is absolutely
    essential. Don’t underestimate the power of a group of peers that
    can provide you with professional feedback and understanding. When
    you feel like you’re losing your grasp, this group will be
    imperative as a sounding-board and moral compass.
  - Trust your gut. Gaslighting takes a toll on your confidence,
    self-esteem, and even your emotional health. This may prompt
    depressive episodes, anxiety, apathy towards your work, or an
    unending sense of being overwhelmed. If you constantly feel attacked
    at work but can’t identify why, pay attention to subtle tactics and
    prompts that seek to undermine or discredit you. Make a record of
    them and escalate it to the appropriate team members when possible.
  - A good example of escalating an issue with a gaslighting manager
    appropriately is talking to your HR representative. If systematic
    sabotage is a reoccurring issue or you consider yourself in constant
    danger of emotional, physical, or mental harm, reach out to a
    trusted resource within the department. Be prepared with written or
    documented examples and think about solution-oriented outcomes you
    can request in your meeting. This will help your case move along in
    a productive manner.
  - Many may suggest telling the offender exactly how you feel, but for
    people who are in a position of power and do not showcase healthy
    emotional boundaries, this may be another opportunity to counter
    your perception of reality. It may be unlikely that the other party
    is willing to do the work to communicate or behave appropriately. In
    such case, another option may be a department transfer or finding a
    new job altogether. Make sure you don’t get caught in an endless
    cycle of having to prove yourself or seeking reasonable outcomes.
    Especially when you’re not speaking to someone reasonable.
    Challenging this type of boss offers an opportunity for them to
    stress your faults while entirely failing to acknowledge their own.
  - Keep the upper hand. Unfortunately, emotional reactions might incite
    the abuser to blame you for escalating the issue inappropriately, or
    prompt them to double-down by alienating you or adding punitive
    punishments. There’s a Polish proverb I find particularly helpful in
    situations like this, it goes, “Not my circus, not my monkeys.” Make
    sure you’re not becoming a sideshow for workplace manipulation. And
    when it’s time to move on to a new chapter in your career, leave the
    monkeys behind.

References

  - [The Ladders -  unmistakable qualities of a bad
    manager](https://www.theladders.com/career-advice/unmistakable-qualities-of-a-bad-manager)
  - [The Ladder -  its not you its them how to survive a gaslighting
    boss](https://www.theladders.com/career-advice/its-not-you-its-them-how-to-survive-a-gaslighting-boss)
  - [The Ladders -  6 left handed executives on-how they approach
    leadership](https://www.theladders.com/career-advice/6-left-handed-executives-on-how-they-approach-leadership)
  - [Tiny Pulse - top leadership
    qualities](https://www.tinypulse.com/blog/sk-top-leadership-qualities)


