###### [Home](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/blob/master/README.md) | [Leadership](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/tree/master/Leadership/README.md) |
------------

# Leadership : Communication - Generation Differences

## Traditionalists

Since this generation was born between 1928 and 1945, you don't see many
of them in workplace. However, they still impressively make up around
three percent of the workforce.

This is the generation who firmly believes in an "Honest day's pay for
an honest day's work." They're extremely loyal and enjoy being respected
for that. Since they're conformists, they value most job titles and
money.

## Baby Boomers

Born between 1946 and 1964, this group is also referred to as the "Me"
generation. They're predominately in their 40s and 50s and are
well-established in their careers. As such, they hold positions of power
and authority, such as law firm leaders and executives.

Boomers are often ambitious, loyal, work-centric, and cynical. They
prefer monetary rewards, but also enjoy non-monetary rewards like
flexible retirement planning and peer recognition. They also don't
require constant feedback and have "all is well unless you say
something" mindset.

Since Boomers are so goal-oriented generation they can be motivated by
promotions, professional development, and having their expertise valued
and acknowledged. Prestigious job titles and recognition like office
size and parking spaces are also important to Boomers.

They can also be motivated through high levels of responsibility, perks,
praise, and challenge.

It's expected that around 70 million Boomers will be retired by 2020.
So, they're also paying attention to 401(k) matching funds, sabbaticals,
and catch-up retirement funding.

They are very competitive, because of their large numbers and they
excel, especially in work situation. They find it difficult, however, to
continue excelling, because of career pressure from younger generations
and their lack of technology knowledge.

## Gen X

Generation X has around 44 to 50 million Americans who were born between
1965 and 1980. They're smaller than the previous and succeeding
generations, but they're often credited for bringing work-life balance.
This is because they saw first hand how their hardworking parents became
so burnout.

Members of the generation are in their 30's and 40's and spent a lot of
time alone as children. This created an entrepreneurial spirit with
them. In fact, Gen Xers make up the highest percentage of startup
founders at 55 percent.

Even if they're not starting their own businesses, Gen Xers prefer to
work independently with minimal supervision. They also value
opportunities to grow and make choices, as well as having relationships
with mentors. They also believe that promotions should be based on
competence and not by rank, age, or seniority.

Gen Xers can be motivated by flexible schedules, benefits like
telecommuting, recognition from the boss, and bonuses, stock, and gift
cards as monetary rewards.

They are considered skeptical and quick to question, goal-oriented and
multi-taskers. Additionally, they value their freedom, flexibility,
recognition, mobility and diversity. They focus on value, are
financially responsible and self-reliant leading them to respond better
to factual messages that demonstrate cost versus value. It's important
for this generation to get a good value for their hard-earned dollars.
Keeping these attributes in mind, particularly the focus on value, when
crafting your public relations or marketing message.

## Millennials (Generation Y)

Born after 1980, they tech-savvy generation is currently the largest age
group in the country. They're in their 20's and are beginning to come
into their own in the workforce. They're the fastest growing segment of
today's workforce.

For some Millennials, they're content with selling their skills to the
highest bidder. That means unlike Boomers, they're not as loyal. In most
cases, they have no problem jumping from one organization to another.

That's not to say that you can't motivate this generation because you
can by offering skills training, mentoring, feedback. Culture is also
extremely important for Millennials.

They want to work in an environment where they can collaborate with
others. Flexible schedules, time off, and embracing the latest
technology to communicate are also important for Gen Y.  They want to
provide input and be heard, a tall order when the boss may be decades
older with micromanagement tendencies.

Millennials also thrive when there's structure, stability, continued
learning opportunities, and immediate feedback. If you do offer monetary
rewards, they prefer stock options.

The seeds of miscommunication can be slowed even before a Millennial
comes on board. The best way to address generational issues is to show
there aren't any.

## Gen Z

This generation is right on the heels of Millennials. And, they're
starting to enter the workplace. Even more interesting, they make-up
one-quarter of America's population, making this generation larger than
baby boomers or Millennials.

This generation is motivated by social rewards, mentorship, and constant
feedback. They also want to be do meaningful and be given
responsibility. Like their predecessors, they also demand flexible
schedules. They are eager for authenticity, they are clever at
streamlining and simplifying procedures. Often have entrepreneurial side
gigs.

Other ways to motivate this generation is through experiential rewards
and badges such as those earned in gaming and opportunities for personal
growth. They also expect structure, clear directions, and transparency.

What's most intriguing about Gen Zers is that 53 percent prefer
face-to-face communication.

## Motivating a Multigenerational Workforce

"To manage across the generations we have to learn to be mindful of each
other and treat each other as individuals," writes Bruce Mayhew.

"No matter what generation we are from, it's too easy to keep doing what
we are doing now and acting like each generation is (or should be),
motivated by the same things we are.

Even if our professional -; management instincts say 'no -; of course we
don't do this,' we have to be careful that our actions don't demonstrate
that we do. We always have to be mindful of our actions and stay open to
listening to each other."

"Use everyone's ability and goals."

However, it's still your responsibility to make every employee,
regardless of their generation, feel engaged. You also need to integrate
them into your company's culture and make them feel valued.

That may sound like a tall order to fill, but you can achieve that by
first making sure that you've hired the right person for the job. Also
make sure that they're a good fit within your company's culture.

You also need to ensure that there's purpose and meaning behind their
work. Creating and sharing a mission or vision should help them
understand why their job exists.

Don't forget to encourage work-life balance, offer health and welfare
benefits, and provide rewards that  *your* employees would care about.

## Baby Boomers Manage Millennials

Baby Boomers sometimes believe Millennials are entitled and lazy, but
this couldn’t be further from the truth.

Millennials have entered a professional world where their realities are
wildly different from the ones Boomers knew. They prioritize things that
don’t make sense to Boomers because their environment has different
demands.

For example, Millennials expect to be fired or let go regularly, so they
want work that is directly in line with their own career equity, which
are the skills and experiences that help them improve their career
prospects. They know their time is limited, so they don’t invest in
doing things outside their own path. Boomers, however, are used to
working hard for a company in exchange for long-term investment in
skills development and for security, like a retirement fund or pension.

But employment security and long-term investment no longer exist in the
modern working world.

### So what are Millennials working for?

I’ve found they often work incredibly hard. But first, they need to feel
like what they’re working toward aligns with their own goals and
aspirations. Ensured upon hiring them that I knew what they wanted to
build in their careers, and ensure that their role within the company
would amount to that end. This created a management-employee
partnership. They worked hard for my company because they felt they were
getting something out of it that benefitted them.

This may sound foreign to Boomers. They come from a world where they
were expected to pay their dues by working hard on whatever the company
needed, with the expectation that the company would reward them over in
the long-term. Now, Millennials will work hard when they are given
opportunities that help them provide for themselves without any kind of
deal.

In order to bridge this generational divide, we have to update the old
bargain in a way that Boomers can understand and Millennials can use.
That means understanding where both sides are coming from in order to
make the best possible deal.

But first, let’s talk a little further about where Boomers are coming
from.

### Baby Boomers have certain expectations of young employees based on their own experience

Boomers entered a company and were expected to pay their dues in order
to move forward. The understanding was if they worked hard for the
company for several years, and the company benefited from their work,
they’d be rewarded with pay raises and promotions. If they stayed with
the company long enough, they’d have a pension.

This was the bargain struck between an employee and company in the old
days: you work hard and in exchange, we’ll give you security and
stability.

Now, Boomers expect Millennials to work for the same bargain. They think
Millennials want to progress too fast and aren’t paying their dues,
which comes off as lazy. Boomers also assume Millennials are flighty and
don’t stay in their roles with any kind of commitment. What Boomers
don’t realize is the other end of the deal they had, the end that’s
supposed to be a payoff for the employee, isn’t there anymore.

### It’s a whole new world out there, and Boomers have to recognize that if they’re going to successfully manage Millennials

They also have to understand what Millennials actually want.

Because Millennials don’t expect to stay with a company for the long
term, their interest is in what can benefit them now.

This doesn’t come from an inability to commit. It’s the result of
massive turnover rates, an unstable economy, and a more competitive
business environment.

What Millennials are learning from their work experience is they will
inevitably get fired, let go, shut down, or need to look elsewhere for
personal growth. They expect to leave a position in a very short amount
of time, so they want to get paid competitively and want to take on more
responsibility quickly. They treat work as a way to build their own
professional equity and skill set as future bargaining chips so when
it’s time to move on, they’re prepared.

Professional services companies like consulting firms, investment banks
and law firms have already found a way to tap into this mindset by
offering skills development and mentorship. In some ways, they’re
preparing their staff to move on to other companies, but they’re also
getting an intense level of hard work from Millennials in the meantime.
In some cases, the employee feels invested and stays long-term.

Tech companies also understand the benefit of this investment and fight
to recruit then keep Millennial talent. For example, Google also
currently sends employees to conferences and boot camps to improve their
skills. This is another way to tap into Millennial aspirations for a
mutual benefit. The team feels like they’re getting skills they can
apply anywhere, and the company gets a return on their investment.

While this is one example of what a new bargain could look like, it’s
not the only one.

### There are other ways to tap into a Millennial’s aspirations, but they don’t come from mind-reading.

Boomers managing Millennials need to understand their employment
relationship is going to be short, so they have to cut to the point.
Conversations around what the employee wants from a job need to happen
as early as the interview in order to continue motivating throughout the
working relationship.

**Some questions to ask include:**

  - What does the employee want from us?
  - What are we providing the employee in exchange?
  - What does the employee want in the long term? The short-term?
  - What do they want from their career?
  - What kinds of goals do they have outside of work?

Once a Boomer has answers to a few of these, they can start to craft a
mutually beneficial working relationship with their Millennial staff.
This means having regular conversations between employee and employer
about what each side wants from the role going forward and how the two
can help each other in the best way.

One thing I do at Codex Protocol is have monthly meetings with each
employee. We don’t talk about their projects or what they’ve
accomplished. I limit the conversations strictly to what they want going
forward and how I can help them achieve that. I’ve noticed in my
Millennial employees, they work the hardest when I’ve given them chances
to do work, achieve goals, and build their resume toward what they want
long term.

There’s a way to build mutually beneficial relationships between
generations, and it comes from compromise on both sides. When given
tasks that make them feel like they’re building toward something,
Millennials will work to help Boomers’ businesses grow. Bridging the
communication gap between these two generations can lead to greater
outcomes on all sides, and maybe we can finally put a stop to all those
think pieces about Millennial work ethic.

References

  - [Different Motivations for Different Generations of Workers:
    Boomers, Gen X, Millennials, and Gen
    Z](https://www.nytimes.com/guides/business/how-to-run-an-effective-meeting)
  - [6 Tips for Millennials Working With Gen
    Xers](https://www.inc.com/quora/6-tips-for-millennials-working-with-gen-xers.md)
  - [The Ladders - The disconnect between baby boomers and millennials
    when it comes to work
    ethic](https://www.theladders.com/career-advice/the-disconnect-between-baby-boomers-and-millennials-when-it-comes-to-work-ethic/amp)
  - [The Globe and Mail - Article how different generations like to be
    mentored](https://www.theglobeandmail.com/business/careers/leadership/article-how-different-generations-like-to-be-mentored/)

