###### [Home](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/blob/master/README.md) | [Leadership](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/tree/master/Leadership/README.md) |
------------

# Leadership : Cost of Onboarding a New Employee (& how to Avoid Them)

We all know that it costs money to hire. Recruiters have to advertise on
job sites, conduct interviews, run background checks and, of course,
dispense and retrieve all of the paperwork associated with adding an
employee.

But did you know that, according to Bersin by Deloitte, the average cost
per hire is almost $4,000?

That number will vary, depending on job level and on hiring practices,
but every hiring manager can relate to the problem of inflated talent
acquisition costs. Why does bringing on a new employee — which is
supposed to be a business solution — drain so many resources? Why do
accountants and financial executives pale at the notion of launching a
candidate search?

If you look a little deeper, you may find that the issue has more to do
with 
[onboarding](https://www.glassdoor.com/employers/blog/onboarding-checklist-culture/) a
new employee after the hiring decision than it does with recruiting.
Many HR professionals have a blind spot for this part of the process.

## How to Calculate the Cost of Onboarding a New Employee

### Onboarding Paperwork and Administrative Time

Onboarding requires a lot of paperwork — benefits enrollment, tax forms,
employee handbooks, NDAs, arbitration agreements and so on. But you
probably don’t spend enough on paper and ink to make a significant dent
in your budget. The real cost sink comes from the time it takes to
manage the completion of that paperwork and other administrative aspects
of onboarding. Let’s say a recruiter makes $25 an hour, and you hire 50 
new employees per year, and it takes 10 hours of administrative time to
process their documents. That adds up to $12,500 per year — probably a
conservative estimate for larger companies.

There are a few ways you can minimize this time. First, digitize your
onboarding paperwork. There are plenty of  HR software solutions on the
market that can bring all of the hiring process’s administrative tasks
into one system, with self-service access for employees. Second, you can
ask your new hires to complete all of their paperwork before day one on
the job. That way, they won’t waste paid time filling out forms; they’ll
spend it learning the job. According to Aberdeen, “best-in-class”
companies are  [53 percent more
likely](http://v1.aberdeen.com/launch/report/research_report/12220-RR-Employee-Engagement-Workplace.asp) to
begin the onboarding process before day one.

### Early Turnover of New Hires

If you invest weeks of time and effort into onboarding only to see an
employee quit six months later, you’ve essentially wasted all of those
resources. If this happens multiple times per year, the financial impact
can be devastating.

Research shows that being more intentional and structured during the
onboarding process can help stave off early turnover. A case study by
Corning Glass Works, for example, found that employees who attended a
structured orientation program were 69 percent more likely to stay with
the company for three years. That’s probably because good onboarding
sets clear expectations for employees and equips them for success, which
means they’re less likely to encounter surprises.

### Deferred Productivity For New Employee

Another hidden cost of onboarding comes from the reduced productivity
that is typical of ramp-up periods, the time during which a new hire is
still learning their role and getting acclimated to the work environment
— i.e. “learning the ropes.”

New employees get less work done because they’re still figuring out how
to execute their responsibilities, navigate new communication workflows
and establish relationships. For example, they might have to do research
on an account and get up to speed before they start working with
decision-makers on that account. Some sources suggest it can take as
long as eight months for an employee to become fully productive.

The answer here is to expand your onboarding process further into the
“probationary” period. Don’t just cover the paperwork and
administrative portion; make a plan for each employee to receive the
training and mentoring they need to succeed. Sit down with them on a
regular basis and see how things are going. Do they have the resources
they need? Have they encountered any problems with processes or
co-workers?

### Provisioning During Onboarding

Every new employee will need to get set up with a certain array of
“stuff.” That stuff could include anything from a laptop and headset
to software credentials, key fobs, ergonomic chairs, monitors, parking
permits and branded clothing. All of this stuff costs money.

Most of it you won’t be able to eliminate, especially if it’s required
for the employee to function. But there are ways to be responsible with
provisioning that can reduce costs in the long run. For starters, keep
track of everything you give out to new employees, and try to
standardize the process as much as possible. An inventory system for
hardware and equipment isn’t a bad idea. This is especially important
for large enterprises that might hire 100+ people every year.

On the IT side, you should also consider the impact of technology on
your ability to scale. If your company is still working from a
collection of desktop-based systems, you’ll need to purchase a new
license and run multiple installs every time you add a team member, not
to mention the expense of doing this for remote workers (vs. the ease of
adding users to a web-based platform).

Even as you try to cut costs associated with hiring new employees,
remember that one of the most expensive recruiting mistakes is a
slipshod hiring process that yields uncommitted workers. When those
employees quit in nine months, you’ll pay the ultimate price. Be smart
and efficient where you can, but don’t cut out crucial steps just to
save a few bucks.

## Calculate Cost-Per-Hire

1.  Benchmark your company against the overall average and your industry
    peers.
2.  Analyze cost-per-hire data by department and position type.
3.  Compare your cost-per-hire against source of hire.

References

  - [Glassdoor - hidden costs employee onboarding
    reduce](https://www.glassdoor.com/employers/blog/hidden-costs-employee-onboarding-reduce/)
  - [Glassdoor  - calculate cost per
    hire](https://www.glassdoor.com/employers/blog/calculate-cost-per-hire/)


