###### [Home](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/blob/master/README.md) | [Leadership](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/tree/master/Leadership/README.md) |
------------

# Leadership : Cultural Fit

## Hiring - Candidate Culture Fit

Evaluating culture fit is dangerous when “culture” means looking for
candidates who are exactly like you and your peers. This monolithic view
develops when recruiters conflate their personal lives with their
professional lives. Instead of focusing on values, this definition of
culture causes recruiters to look for applicants who went to their alma
mater or, perhaps even worse, someone they “would share a beer with.”

Hiring for culture fit doesn't have to be bias-riddled, though. Keep the
term positive by recognizing that culture is tied to your company's core
values—not specific behaviors and experiences—and by defining your
values in a way that is intentional and inclusive. Each principle should
directly relate to a candidate’s ability to thrive at your organization
and should be broad enough to align with any skilled applicants.

Here are a few examples to make the distinction clearer:

  - **Exclusive value**: “Our team is built with individuals who have a
    strong academic record and have shown a passion for lifelong
    learning.”

  - **Inclusive value**: “Our team members share a desire to be lifelong
    learners.”

For most positions, a high GPA and graduate education aren’t required
qualifications that lead to better job performance. However
anyone—regardless of their background—can have an enthusiasm for
learning, and a drive to continually grow and learn can lead to stronger
job performance.

When your company's values are defined explicitly and inclusively,
evaluating culture fit is a valuable process, not a problematic one.
Without excluding any applicants based on their background, you're able
to find the candidates that are a strong fit for your company, and
likely to stick around.

## Why does it Matter

Your employees spend a substantial portion of their lives dedicated to
work and building a career. If they don’t love the work they’re doing
and the people they’re working with, that can quickly spiral into an
undesirable work environment — which will inevitably lead to employee
turnover.

As leaders and hiring managers, it’s important you take this into
consideration and understand the impact hiring new employees can have on
your existing team, their productivity, and the health and growth
potential of your company.

If you’re looking to grow, it should be done with intention and your
existing company culture in mind. Otherwise, you run the risk of making
a bad investment and hire.

Here are a few critical reasons why making culture fit a priority and
finding the “right” hire are so important to your business.

## Making a new hire is a major investment. You want to get it right the first time.

Hiring and  [onboarding a new employee is
expensive](https://www.glassdoor.com/employers/blog/hidden-costs-employee-onboarding-reduce/).
How expensive? Well, that cost varies by business, but there are a few
factors that are universal.

First, let’s talk about the soft cost of time.

Once you’ve identified a hiring need, you’re probably looking to fill
that position sooner than later. Until you are able to do so, this
oftentimes means that other members of your team must own those
responsibilities until you’ve got the new person in place.

Their time and happiness are important, but so is finding the right
person to own that role. So while the need to fill an open position can
create pressure to make a quick hire,  **it’s worth the wait to ensure
you’ve made the right hire**.

Otherwise, you might not actually provide the relief and support your
team needs.

**Going through a formal hiring process is time-consuming.** Team
members spend dozens of hours reviewing applications and resumes,
coordinating and conducting interviews. This time compounds as you
increase the number of people involved in the hiring process (which you
should) to ensure the team working with the new hire feels confident in
their capabilities and fit with the company.

Post-hire, the team will also invest significant time onboarding the new
team member.

Having recently completed my own onboarding at IMPACT, I can speak first
hand to this experience, and the amount of time and effort dedicated by
my team to ensure I was set up for success.

Depending on the company and amount of time that can be afforded to
getting you ramped up, onboarding can take weeks, if not months, to
ensure you’re properly trained and acclimated. It involves multiple
teams/departments, including HR, direct managers and peers, and other
company leaders who commit to educating you and providing you with
critical resources on the company culture, processes, technology, and
your core job function.

Now, let’s factor in the hard cost of the financial investment.

Beyond an employee’s compensation package, there are multitudes of other
financial commitments associated with bringing on a new person. These
could include, but are not limited to:

  - Travel for interviewing and onboarding
  - Relocation/moving expenses
  - Technology and equipment (e.g. laptop, monitor, mobile devices, key
    fob, another desk, and office supplies, etc.)
  - Swag and more

For example, at IMPACT we not only invest in an on-site, in-person
interview at the end of our hiring process to ensure it’s a good fit for
company  *and* employee, but we also bring each new hire in for a full
week of on-site onboarding with the Connecticut team.

Beyond travel, each new employee is provided the technology needed for
their day-to-day work (i.e. laptop, monitor, mouse and keyboard,
headset, etc.), as well as some awesome IMPACT swag so they’re outfitted
like the rest of the team.

### A bad-fit hire creates negative energy and decreased productivity/momentum for the team

Have you ever worked with someone who just didn’t jibe with the rest of
the team? Maybe they didn’t have a team-first mentality, participate in
company activities or bring a positive, uplifting attitude to their
work?

While it shouldn’t be a requirement that every employee be an A-team
player and involved in every aspect of the company, it is important that
the team be aligned at some level to share in that collective culture
and purpose.

Even if a new employee can complete their job functions effectively, a
negative attitude, infighting, and other distractions can drag down the
rest of the team.

If the team dynamic shifts and creates a negative work environment for
other employees, you could end up affecting the happiness of other team
members, or worse...losing a valued team member entirely.

### Losing a great team member (or having a high employee turnover rate) is bad for team morale and business.

Losing a critical or valued team member is never easy. It not only
creates issues from a workflow standpoint, but it can deeply affect the
morale of your team and the confidence of your customers/clients.  

Additionally, the longevity of your employee base shows stability and
can serve as a strong indicator to future applicants that you offer a
career destination versus a job, which is something many employees are
looking for when considering an employer. People want to be reassured
that they can grow and evolve within your organization.

It’s also not cheap to lose a team member. On average,  [it costs 150%
of a mid-level person’s salary to replace
them](https://www.tlnt.com/what-was-leadership-thinking-the-shockingly-high-cost-of-employee-turnover/).
So when that $80,000 person isn’t a good hire, it costs the company an
about $120,000 to bring in someone else (fingers crossed  *they’re* a
good hire\!). This is certainly not great for the bottom line.

So why is it so important that you hire for a culture fit? Because
making the right hire makes all the difference. Acquiring a great
employee brings countless benefits, including:

  - Technical skill and increased team capabilities and expertise,
  - value beyond their core job function,
  - a positive work environment/team dynamic,
  - encouragement and inspiration of excellence, and so on.

## Ways to find candidates who match your culture

### Honestly craft your employer brand

You'll naturally attract candidates who are aligned with your culture if
your employer brand authentically reflects your values.

If you don't breathe internally what you brand externally, you will run
into trouble. Your messaging will attract candidates who aren't a great
fit and aren't likely to stay at your company.

For example, say your company promotes its workplace as one with a
passion for lifelong learning. With this messaging, your company should
offer employees plenty of educational opportunities, like tuition
assistance, training programs, or opportunities to attend conferences.
New hires with a passion for learning may have joined expecting these
kinds of offerings, so if your company doesn’t walk the walk in terms of
learning opportunities, new employees may end up unhappy and even decide
to leave.

Honestly crafting an employer brand is easier said than done. Work your
way through the process by following these strategies:

  - **Don't worry about competitors' branding.** The candidate who is a
    great match for your competitor may be a terrible match for your
    company, so don't try to emulate competitor messaging.

  - **Focus on the values that make your company unique.** Highlighting
    your one-of-a-kind philosophies will help your company stand out to
    applicants who align with your culture.

### Ask the right questions

The mistake that many companies make with culture fit is informally
gauging whether a candidate is a good match for their workplace. A
decision about the applicant might be made based on a casual lunch
conversation or in an unstructured interview.

Be intentional about the questions you're asking a candidate when
assessing culture fit. I recommend behavior-based questions that are
tied to your values.

For example, say you're a tech company, and one of your core values is
“respect the user.” In that case, a great interview question about
behavior would be, “Tell me about a time when you were involved in a
decision that didn't respect the user.” The applicant will tell you what
they did to correct the situation, and you can assess how user-focused
they are, based on their actions.

Get the most out of behavioral, value-based questions by following these
interviewing tips:

  - **Be prepared to probe and dig deeper.** The conversation doesn't
    stop at the applicant's first answer. Get to the root of the initial
    question by asking follow-up questions to fully understand the
    applicant's answer.

  - **Plan questions beforehand with hiring managers.** This planning
    will help the interview process flow smoothly, and it's an
    opportunity to catch any questions that are biased. You may also
    consider implementing an  [interviewing
    rubric](https://rework.withgoogle.com/guides/hiring-use-structured-interviewing/steps/use-a-grading-rubric/) in
    order to ensure that everyone is aligned on how to objectively
    assess for each value.

### Get everyone involved in recruiting

When all employees are involved in recruiting, it's much easier to
communicate your culture to candidates.

Applicants build a strong sense of your company values when they're able
to meet with all types of employees at your company, not just
recruiters. By talking to a potential coworker, candidates can gain more
insight into whether they are a good fit for the company's culture.

For example, I once set up an informal lunch meeting between a candidate
and an engineering leader that had a major impact on the applicant's
offer decision. The engineering leader really espoused the values of the
company that I had communicated to the candidate, so I thought it would
be useful for the candidate to speak with him. The lunch sealed the deal
for the applicant.

If your company doesn't have a  [culture of
recruiting](https://hire.google.com/articles/create-a-culture-of-recruiting/),
use these tactics to encourage participation in the hiring process:

  - **Set up cross-functional interviews** or meetings with an employee
    from a different department. The process gives candidates a deeper
    sense of the culture by talking to someone who isn't trying to
    promote their department.

  - **Encourage executive involvement.** If employees see that
    executives are involved in recruiting, they will feel motivated to
    pitch in as well. Ask senior leadership to speak at career events
    and communicate with candidates publicly.

Employees who align with your core values are more likely to contribute
to your company for years. Find those applicants by evaluating culture
fit. Once you recognize that culture fit is really a reflection of your
core values that anyone can embrace, it becomes an inclusive, valuable
framework.

Here are some elements and standards to consider that can inspire and
best communicate your company culture to candidates:

  - **Mission**. Invest in employees who believe in the greater purpose
    of your organization. They believe that individual contributions
    enable us to realize that mission each and every day.
  - **Vision**. Look for team members who are committed to helping you
    reach and exceed organizational and team goals. Their drive and
    ideas are critical to growth and innovation.
  - **Purpose and Passion**. Identify candidates who will show up
    excited and be present — their energy and positivity are infectious.
    Fostering intangible passion and purpose, along with the right
    opportunities and guidance, will inspire your entire organization.
  - **Value.** Find employees who look to create enormous value — for
    the organization and those you serve.

While you can discuss these as an executive or leadership team, it may
also be a good exercise to take several questions back to the broader
team and get their perspective. You may be surprised to see that the
company culture has taken on a personality and perspective of its own.

Consider posing the following questions to your current team:

  - What is the tone of our company voice?
  - What do we value as an organization?
  - What qualities do the best employees embody that help make our
    company an incredible place to work?
  - Describe a time when you felt excited or inspired working with a
    teammate? What about that experience helped foster those feelings?
  - Where do we want to be five years from now, and who do we need/want
    on the team that will enable us to get there?

Once you’ve collected thoughtful responses from your team, use their
answers to help define the ideal team member and evolve your interview
questions accordingly.

## Culture Isn't Always Organic

It's easier than you think; you just need to put your mind to it.
Everything you really want from a great culture is wrapped up in a
pretty simple formula: vision + values + plans and targets.

**Vision:** Where are your company's goals? Why are you in this
particular business, and what do you ultimately hope to accomplish?

**Values**: More than pretty words on the wall, values need to reflect
what really makes your company different. What is the DNA of someone who
would work well there? Core values aren't mere platitudes, such as
"People are our most important asset." They reflect a point of view,
such as "Competition drives improvement."

**Plans and targets:** As a leader, you need to know not only where your
business is going but how to get there. If you communicate your
objectives clearly, your team members will know the score and how to
contribute.

Each of the above elements is supported by  **clarity **and 
**consistency**, meaning the company does what it says and says what it
does. In my experience, the companies that frustrate people the most
provide mixed messages. When someone realizes he signed up for the wrong
team, he'll likely leave on his own. When a company tells someone one
thing and acts another way, that person will get frustrated and angry.

### Why Culture is Important

Organizations can actively create strong cultural environments that
represent their values and make their company a great place for
employees and customers by focusing on these attributes.

Out of all the employees and business leaders whom I have interviewed
over the years, the vast majority of them have always told me that
culture is what they care about most. Unlike the 
[physical](https://www.inc.com/jacob-morgan/how-physical-environment-impacts-employee-experience.md?cid=search) and 
[technological](https://www.inc.com/jacob-morgan/forget-enterprise-grade-technology-consumer-grade-technology-is-future.md?cid=search) environments, 
[cultural](https://www.inc.com/jacob-morgan/want-to-change-your-culture-start-by-redefining-manager.md?cid=search) environment
isn't something that you can see, taste, touch, or breath in. This is
the only environment that you feel. That feeling is the pit in your
stomach when you don't want to go to work or the excitement and
butterflies you get from wanting to go to work. Simply put, the cultural
environment is the vibe of your organization and the actions that are
taken to create that vibe or feeling.

<kbd>![](https://www.incimages.com/uploaded_files/inlineimage/630x0/CELEBRATED%20\(widescreen\)_50291.jpg)</kbd>

The culture of the organization determines how employees are treated,
the products or services that are created, the partnerships that are
established, and even how employees actually get their jobs done. What's
fascinating about culture, though, is that it exists regardless of
whether the organization realizes it or decides to create it. A
technological environment doesn't exist without actual things that the
organization deploys. A physical environment doesn't exist unless the
organization creates or designates one. But the corporate culture is
like air--it's around all the employees who work there even if they
aren't always aware of it. That is what it's so crucial to actually
create and design a culture instead of just letting it exist.
              

So what does the cultural environment actually look like? There are 10
attributes that organization must focus on to create a CELEBRATED
culture:

  - Company is viewed positively. Just like when you bring home a
    significant other to meet the family for the first time and want to
    get their approval, employees want to feel good about the company
    they work for. Employees should be proud to work for an organization
    because it has a good reputation in the industry and in the
    community.
  - Everyone feels valued. Employees want to feel valued at work, which
    covers a lot of categories. It means that their work is appreciated,
    their presence is noticed, their ideas are listened to, and they are
    compensated appropriately for the work they put in.
  - Legitimate sense of purpose. When employees have a real sense of
    purpose, they feel connected to the organization and are more likely
    to put in their best work because they want to, not just because
    they need to. Employees and employers need to work together to
    develop a sense of purpose that motivates everyone to do their best.
  - Employees feel like they're part of a team. Work is a team sport,
    and the best organizations allow their employees to be on a number
    of different teams. It could be geographically or within a
    department or a group of people tasked with solving a certain
    problem. Teams are dynamic and fluid and much more than can just be
    put on an organizational chart.
  - Believes in diversity and inclusion. Diverse organizations bring
    together people from all kinds of backgrounds, religions, races,
    sexual orientations, and generations and mixes them to work well
    together. In an inclusive environment, employees are free to be
    themselves and share their unique points of view.
  - Referrals come from employees. When we find something good, no
    matter if it's a restaurant or a movie, we naturally want to share
    it with others. The same should be true of the workplace--if it's a
    good place to work, employees should naturally want to share it with
    others and refer their classmates, friends, and family to work there
    as well.
  - Ability to learn new things and given resources to do so and
    advance. One of the worst feelings for an employee is that they are
    stuck in their job with nothing new to learn and nowhere to go.
    Development programs, training, and new technology can encourage
    employees to learn something new and keep them engaged and moving
    forward.
  - Treats employees fairly. Sticky situations may arise at work, but
    the best organizations treat their employees fairly. That means
    there aren't biases towards certain ideas or types of people and
    that putting in real effort gets noticed by people who matter.
  - Executives and managers are coaches and mentors. The days of leaders
    sitting at the top of the organization and looking down on employees
    are long gone. Today, executives and managers are on the ground,
    interacting with employees to encourage them and coach them through
    their jobs and careers.
  - Dedicated to employee health and wellness. Employees can't focus at
    work if they aren't taking care of their physical and mental health.
    Forward-thinking organizations realize that wellness is connected to
    job performance and provide ways for employees to improve their
    health at work and at home.

By focusing on these elements, organizations can actively create strong
cultural environments that represent their values and make their company
a great place for employees and customers.

### Managing Employee will define Culture

Nice versus Competent two-by-two matrix.

It's obvious that businesses want as many  [nice/competent
employees](https://www.inc.com/robert-glazer/heres-why-theres-no-such-thing-as-good-company-culture.md) as
possible, and to move on from any unpleasant, incompetent employees.
What's more challenging, he noted, are the people who exist in the other
two quadrants--people who are talented but difficult, which he referred
to as "brilliant jerks," and people who are nice but don't perform well,
which he termed "friendly incompetents."

<kbd>![](attachments/458555498/458559752.jpg)</kbd>

Many organizations tolerate the brilliant jerk even though that person
is very dangerous to company culture. However, he said people in the
friendly incompetent quadrant are the ones who can present the biggest
barrier to success.

I eventually realized company culture depends upon how a leadership team
handles those two types of employees-- <span class="underline">friend
incompetents</span> and  <span class="underline">brilliant jerks</span>.
It's more difficult than you'd think, as those people eventually hurt
your business and/or your morale. Here's why.

### A brilliant jerk's high performance isn't always worth it

It's tempting to ignore brilliant jerks' bad behavior because they get
great results. These are the people who do the right things for the
wrong reasons. Plenty of world-changing companies were built by people
who were gifted but difficult to work with, or even disrespectful to
their colleagues.

But leaders who lean on the talent of a brilliant jerk, or even reward
them with advancement, run the risk of poisoning their culture and
alienating other key employees. Most people have no interest in working
with people who are rude or discourteous to them, and you will likely
lose other top performers who are sick of dealing with your brilliant
jerks. They can drive away valuable employees and negatively impact your
entire company culture.

### Friendly incompetents may be great people, but they don't guarantee good results.

To be clear, the term incompetent is not a general
characterization--friendly incompetent is meant to convey that the
person isn't performing well in their current role. These are people who
have a positive attitude and exude your core values. This is why you
give them second and third chances to perform, even if they keep making
the same mistakes and missing the mark.

It's often difficult for managers to give tough and honest feedback to a
person they really like. Instead, they allow the poor performance to
continue because they overlook the poor performance or they keep hoping
they will turn the corner. However, this inaction sends a clear message
to others: if you are likable, then results don't matter. That is not
the hallmark of a high performing culture.

We've had this happen at our company, including with an employee we'll
call "Jim." Jim was a beloved colleague who wasn't growing along with
the business. Rather than ignoring the problem, we had a candid
conversation about his performance. It turned out Jim's job had turned
into something he didn't enjoy anymore,  [therefore he was not engaged
and wanted to do something
else](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yV2Qfj0ft0o).

People who are nice, but underperforming, don't always need to leave the
company. In some cases, they need coaching and may just be in the wrong
role. But it's important for leaders to acknowledge that people they
like still need to meet high standards--and to hold them to those
standards. Otherwise, top-performing employees will notice the double
standards and may move on.

### You are what you tolerate

<kbd>![](attachments/458555498/458559752.jpg)</kbd>

It can be easy to overlook things like a few missed metrics or
complaints about a difficult employee. But these might be smaller signs
of a bigger problem--your company values are ultimately defined by your
tolerance of performance and behavior.

The best companies have cultures that are both healthy and
high-performing. If you tolerate, or even reward, brilliant jerks
because they perform well, you introduce toxicity into your culture.
People will believe it's a fend for yourself mentality and will
eventually either adopt the behavior that is rewarded or chose to leave.

Conversely, it's important for employees to know that even the most
beloved employees are still expected to meet the company standards. If
you tolerate poor performance, that inevitably pushes the burden onto
your top performers to pick up the slack. Top performers don't want to
work somewhere where people aren't expected to pull their weight.

Ultimately, the way you handle these two employees says everything about
your culture and company values.

### Increaseing Positive Culture

#### Change starts wtih management

Organizations that consider managers as leaders tend to be more
forward-thinking and have replaced the outdated idea that managers sit
on pedestals to boss around employees.

What do you think of when you hear the word “
[manager](https://www.inc.com/claire-lew/screw-golden-rule-managers-do-not-treat-employees-way-youd-like-to-be-treated-heres-why.md?cid=search)”?
If you’re like many employees, the words that pop into your head could
include zookeeper, cog-driver, or dictator or characteristics like
outdated or out of touch. The typical definition of the word “manager”
is simply a person who manages others. In many cases in the media and in
real life, managers are portrayed as being aloof, arrogant, or simply
incompetent and just there to do less work than their 
[employees](https://www.inc.com/stacey-ferreira/why-having-employees-with-flexible-hours-will-help-you-make-it-through-holidays.md?cid=search) but
make more 
[money](https://www.inc.com/amanda-abella/3-proven-ways-to-make-money-from-a-business-conference.md?cid=search).
It’s no surprise that many companies are turning away from the term
manager because it can be viewed so negatively and seen as old
fashioned.

On the other hand, what do you think of when you hear the word “leader”?
For most people, it invokes thoughts of being inspired, led somewhere
new, and gathered as a team. A leader is someone you can turn to who can
transform your work into something more meaningful and help you reach a
far-off goal. For many people, a leader isn’t an assigned or promoted
position, but rather a characteristic that someone naturally possesses.

Over time, our language has shifted so that managers and leaders have
taken on completely different definitions. One is generally considered
negatively and viewed as outdated, while the other is positive and
forward-thinking. The simple rift between two similar words may not seem
important in the long run, but it has actually created two dichotomies
inside organizations that have a large effect on how things are run.
Even without realizing it, employees may have hard feelings towards a
manager or not like their methods because of their title, while managers
may subconsciously fill their roles with a commanding presence instead
of leading a team of employees to greater success. If someone has
naturally leadership abilities, they may be viewed more positively by
employees than a manager, even though their responsibilities might be
different.

But what would happen if we focused on redefining the term manager and
equated the position with leader so that the words were interchangeable?
That simple change could have huge impacts within organizations, both
for employees and managers. Instead of feeling simply like cogs in the
machine, employees could feel empowered and like there was someone they
could go to for help, inspiration, and connectivity. Managers would feel
empowered and have the tools to inspire workers instead of simply
passing on information from executives and driving simple tasks. Instead
of feeling locked into the corporate rules, leader managers can have
more creativity to get the job done and help their employees reach new
heights.

Organizations that consider managers as leaders tend to be more
forward-thinking and have replaced the outdated idea that managers sit
on pedestals to boss around employees. This is especially important in
the future of work where most employees don’t simply work their way up
the corporate ladder anymore. By changing how organizations think about
leadership and management, organizations can make sure they are hiring
people who inspire and lead others no matter their position in the
company. Changing the definition of the word manager also changes how
companies reward and promote employees, which could resonate especially
well with a new generation of workers. Over time, we would likely see
the negative connotation for the word manager decrease and empowerment
and interaction between managers and employees increase as those
imaginary walls come down.

It may seem like a simple change, but redefining the term manager can
have a huge impact on a company and lead to a changed mindset for
everyone within its walls.

[We Need to Redefine What a Manager is](www.youtube.com/embed/4dkZLJOUtL8?wmode=opaque)

#### Frequently Assessed Job Attitudes

Job satisfaction and work engagement are the attitudes most familiar
professionals, and the most frequently assessed through academic and
applied research. These job attitudes have been linked to enhanced
employee and business performance and retention.

Job satisfaction is emotion-based and may change from day to day. It
reflects an employee's positive or negative evaluation of the job and
its characteristics.

Work engagement is a motivational concept, describing employees who feel
energized, enthusiastic and invigorated about their jobs. Engaged
employees will devote their personal resources—emotional, cognitive and
physical—to carrying out work tasks.

#### A Less Familiar Job Attitude

Perceived organizational support has been extensively studied in
academia but is mostly unknown. This job attitude reflects employees'
beliefs about the extent to which their organization cares about and
values them. Creating a supportive organization is a necessary
foundation for, and motivator of, a satisfied and engaged workforce.

Supportive organizations have high-quality practices that meet their
employees' needs (especially as to growth and development), supervisors
who value their employees and treat them with respect, and fair policies
and procedures. Employees in supportive organizations feel valued for
their contributions and identify with organizational goals and believe
that they will be rewarded for their performance.

#### Aligning Policies and Practices to Attitudes

Leaders are in a unique position to affect job attitudes. By carefully
considering the employee outcomes or behaviors that such policies and
practices are intended to influence, with an in-depth understanding of
the differences among job attitudes can better take advantage of them.

To enhance employee and business performance, for example, an
intervention might focus on increasing work engagement. To improve
employee retention, on the other hand, an initiative might instead focus
on increasing organizational support and job satisfaction.

Numerous resources describe strategies for creating an engaged and
satisfied workforce, but few resources provide practitioner-oriented
guidance for building perceived organizational support. Accordingly,
here are several research-based tips to help HR professionals create a
supportive workplace:

  - **Create a positive work environment.** Increase the presence of
    enriching job characteristics, which signal to employees that the
    organization cares about their well-being. These include meaningful
    work tasks, the opportunity to work autonomously and occasions to
    participate in organizational decision-making.
  - **Help employees grow and develop.** Provide learning and growth
    opportunities relevant to employees' jobs, and ensure that they can
    put their newly developed knowledge and skills to use. This
    communicates to employees that the organization values their
    contributions.
  - **Align benefits with employees' needs.** Offer employees flexible
    benefits that they really need (e.g., telecommuting, supportive
    family policies), and that they view as being given voluntarily.
    Such offerings demonstrate the organization's concern for employees
    and will be appreciated. Required or commonly available benefits
    (e.g., health insurance, retirement plans) contribute little to the
    perception of organizational support.
  - **Money isn't everything**. Surprisingly, pay levels do not relate
    to perceived organizational support, job satisfaction or other job
    attitudes. Organizations cannot simply spend their way to a happy,
    supported and engaged workforce. Go off the beaten path to compete
    for talent.

#### Retain Company Values

##### Physical Environment Impacts Employee Experience

The right physical workspace can help us feel more creative, engaged,
and connected to the company we work for.

There are three key environments that make up the employee experience:
technology, culture, and the physical space. I explore all three in  [my
latest
book](https://www.amazon.com/Employee-Experience-Advantage-Employees-Workspaces/dp/111932162X/ref=asap_bc?ie=UTF8),
but let's talk about the physical space, or the place where employees
actually work. This is our surroundings and includes everything from the
art that hangs on the wall to the catered meals the organization may
offer to the 
[cubicles](https://www.inc.com/jacob-morgan/the-cubicle-was-actually-ahead-of-its-time.md?cid=search) or
open floor plan 
[employees](https://www.inc.com/jacob-morgan/what-employees-care-about-most-at-work.md?cid=search) may
sit in. It comprises 30% of the employee experience. It's no secret why
our physical space matters: we all want to spend our workdays in
environments that energize and inspire us. These types of workspaces
help us feel more creative, engaged, and connected to the company we
work for. Not only that, but the physical environments also act as
symbols that represent the organization and our decision to be there.
Great physical environments act as positive symbols and representations;
poor physical spaces act as negative ones. This was first discovered by
Edgar Schein, a former professor at the MIT Sloan School of Management
and author of the book  *Organizational Culture and Leadership*. In this
book he talks about the three levels of organizational culture, which
are artifacts, values, and assumptions. According to Schein, all three
of these things must align. There are a lot of parallels between these
three levels and the three areas of  [employee
experience](https://www.inc.com/jacob-morgan/why-transparency-matters-to-employee-experience.md?cid=search).

Interestingly enough, with the rise of co-working locations, global
connectivity, and collaboration technologies, many people believe that
offices are going to die. This is only somewhat true. The traditional
idea of an office is indeed on its way out--the one with gray walls,
brown carpets, and lines of cubicles. However, the buildings themselves
are going through a bit of an office design renaissance, and instead of
disappearing, offices are reemerging as employee experience centers.
According to commercial real estate firm CBRE, commercial real estate in
the U.S. is at a seven-year high, and organizations such as Amazon,
Cisco, Samsung, Whirlpool, GE, Schneider Electric, Deloitte, Microsoft,
LinkedIn, and many others are investing millions of dollars into
creating these employee experience centers, for a very good reason. As
the world of work continues to evolve and change, so do the environments
in which the world actually gets done.

It's like redesigning a car by upgrading the engine and leaving the
interior the same--it might be more powerful, but if it's not pleasant
to spend time in, you won't want to drive it\! A recent study by
furniture manufacturer Steelcase found that nearly 90% of workers around
the world are less than satisfied with their work environments, which
means there is a lot of room for improvement.

A study from 2010 in  *British Journal of Management* found that there
is a social identity that employees have with their workspaces, and the
physical environment can affect the psychological comfort of the
employees who work there.

To create a great physical environment for employees, organizations need
to focus on the following major characteristics, which are abbreviated
as COOL:

  - Chooses to bring in friends and visitors
  - Offers flexibility
  - Organizations' values are reflected
  - Leverages multiple workspace options
  - By focusing on these areas, which we'll look at more in-depth in
    future articles, organizations can create a physical environment
    that represents employees and encourages them to get involved and do
    their best work.

References

  - [Inc - why culture matters at
    work](https://www.inc.com/jacob-morgan/why-culture-matters-at-work.md)
  - [SHRM Better Workplace -  creating  a supportive
    workplace](https://www.shrm.org/resourcesandtools/hr-topics/behavioral-competencies/relationship-management/pages/creating-a-supportive-workplace.aspx)
  - [Google -
    culture-fit-interview-questions](https://hire.google.com/articles/culture-driven-recruiting)
  - [Google - culture driven
    recruiting](https://hire.google.com/articles/culture-driven-recruiting)
  - [Impactbnd - why determining culture fit is so important in the
    hiring
    process](https://www.impactbnd.com/blog/why-determining-culture-fit-is-so-important-in-the-hiring-process)
  - [Inc - heres why theres no such thing as good company
    culture](https://www.inc.com/robert-glazer/heres-why-theres-no-such-thing-as-good-company-culture.md)
  - [Inc - how physical environment impacts employee
    experience](https://www.inc.com/jacob-morgan/how-physical-environment-impacts-employee-experience.md?cid=search)
  - [Inc - Want to change your culture start by redefining
    manager](https://www.inc.com/jacob-morgan/want-to-change-your-culture-start-by-redefining-manager.md?cid=search)
  - [Linkedin - How you manage 2 kinds employees define your companys
    robert
    glazer](https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/how-you-manage-2-kinds-employees-define-your-companys-robert-glazer/?trackingId=DAvK4FUgTumTS86%2FgNETag%3D%3D)


