###### [Home](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/blob/master/README.md) | [Leadership](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/tree/master/Leadership/README.md) |
------------


# Information Technology : Dealing with the Elephant


Conflicts are fascinating. Now, this may be the organisational
psychologist in me talking, or the facilitator who senses them in the
groups I work with. But the other part of me dreads them. They scare me.
They make me anxious. And when I’m engaged in a conflict, my emotions
can get the better of me and make me do and say things I later regret.

One simple truth is that conflict is a natural part of working with
other people. Another is that our understanding of what ‘conflict’ is,
and when we are *in* it, is very limited — making it hard to effectively
deal with them.

> “Our understanding of what ‘conflict’ is, and when we are *in* it, is
> very limited — making it hard to effectively deal with them”

If you ask someone what “conflict” is, they usually explain it in terms
of a verbal dispute, raised voices, slamming doors and angry faces. But
most of our conflicts are far less visible. They may not be explicitly
expressed by those experiencing it, but they *do* influence the dynamics
of a group. And either the whole group is aware of this, or some are.
This is the proverbial ‘ **Elephant In The Room**’. And when you don’t
see them, or don’t talk about them, it limits your ability as a team to
grow and learn from it. It also means that valuable energy is siphoned
into a conflict, instead of working together.

## Types of Elephants

When preparing for the workshop, we worked together to identify
‘archetypes’ of conflicts. The following absolutely non-complete,
non-authoritative list emerged:

  - A ‘ **blame game**’ where one person or group feels they are
    unsuccessful because they are not getting what they need from
    others; while others, in turn, believe the person or group is not
    succeeding because of a lack of commitment or skill;
  - A group or person claims ‘ **most of the air time**’ by going on and
    on about something they think or feel, while others remain silent or
    don’t share what they really think or feel;
  - Acts of ‘ **sabotage**’, where one person or group actively or
    passively obstructs another person or group from achieving their
    goal, for example by not showing up for meetings or collaboration
    opportunities;
  - **‘Stepping on each other’s toes**’ ****due to a lack of clarity in
    how roles and responsibilities are distributed or because people are
    “not stepping up” according to some, and the resulting frustration
    from that;
  - There is the perception that a person or a group is ‘ **not**
    **taking responsibility**’ for a decision or is ‘ **free-riding**’
    on the success of others;
  - Because the system can’t see itself, everyone feels that they are ‘
    **contributing a bigger share**’ or working harder than the others;
  - People or groups feel that others are ‘ **not fully honest**’ about
    their motives;
  - People or groups **‘bask in the light’** of someone they hold in
    high esteem, like a CEO or a manager, while others feel neglected,
    unheard or unseen by this person;
  - People or groups have different ideas on how to move forward, while
    also being frustrated by the inability of others to see their point
    of view (a **task conflict**);

<kbd>![](https://miro.medium.com/max/8006/1*qD_ivVsR4pbdkPXQae3jeg.png)</kbd>

One common theme is that many conflicts are essentially about our
relative status in a group. Specifically, when we feel our status is
lowered because others don’t value us or our contributions. When there
is disharmony in the social hierarchy, this causes strong emotional
responses — like frustration, anger, fear, shame, sadness or anxiety —
in those experiencing the disharmony. Its a good example of how our
primate brains evolved to value social hierarchies and our position in
them.

Another characteristic is that conflicts are often unilateral, in that
they are experienced by one party but not the others. This also depends
on our personal beliefs; what one person perceives as an attack on
personal status may be perceived by another as a ‘good and productive
debate’.

### What happens when there are Elephants …

A lot of research has gone into exploring how groups can deal with
conflicts productively. In a large meta-analysis of 30 scientific
studies that explored the effects of task- and relational conflict in
teams, De Dreu & Weingart (2003) found that conflict has a strong
(negative) impact on team performance and work satisfaction. Another
finding was that the impact increases as the work becomes more complex.
The study concluded that the common belief that ‘conflict is good for
teams’ is not supported by data. The authors note that although a
*little* conflict can be productive, they tend to quickly escalate and
overload our ability to work together productively.

### Surfacing The Elephant

With most conflicts living below the surface, and having a significant
impact on our effectiveness, we have to develop the skills and
understanding on how to surface, address and navigate them. It also
requires that we change beliefs we may have about conflict:

  - Most conflicts, especially those living below the surface, **can’t
    be solved or resolved** in the sense of arriving at a place where
    everyone involved is 100% happy and comfortable with the outcome.
    Therefore, a first step in learning to navigate conflict
    productively is to let go of the belief that all conflicts *can* and
    *should* be (re)solved. This is also why we emphasize that conflicts
    can be navigated, not necessarily resolved;
  - Conflict is a **natural part of human collaboration**. It happens to
    everyone, no matter how skilled you are, how non-violent your
    communication is and how considerate you are of others. Conflict in
    itself is not bad or something that should be avoided. In fact,
    conflict is a great source of learning and growth, provided we learn
    how to navigate it productively;
  - **Conflicts** **don’t disappear when we choose to ignore or avoid
    them**. Overwhelmingly, research shows that open-minded conversation
    is the best way forward. And this is hard. It requires that we learn
    how to develop and express our ideas and emotions, that we
    understand and empathize with other views, that we integrate and
    create new ideas together and that we have to agree to implement
    relevant solutions (Johnson et al. 2014);
  - Although not all conflicts can be truly solved in the sense of
    finding a solution, often the act of **talking about it openly** and
    showing the effect it has on each of us is an important step
    forward. This will be messy and difficult no matter how skilled you
    are. And that’s fine;

Although surfacing elephants can be messy, difficult work, it rewards
teams with growth and learning when done productively. Bringing an
elephant to the surface also frees up significant psychological
resources; instead of complaining about their teammates at the dinner
table, team members can redirect that energy into solving problems,
coming up with new ideas, and rejuvenating outside of work. Teams that
learn how to surface elephants can dance with conflict instead of
running away from it.

## Conflict Styles: What Sciences Says

### Conflicts are about (unmet) needs

One question that often pops up is: when is something a conflict? One
distinction that is commonly made is between conflicts that are
disagreements on how to proceed on a shared task and conflicts that are
about feelings of animosity with another person. But this distinction is
not clearcut, as even a difference of opinion can be taken very
personally (e.g. Simons and Peterson, 2000).

> “A way to understand conflict is to understand it in terms of unmet
> needs \[ … \] Most conflicts in our day-to-day life are about unmet
> social needs.”

A simpler way to understand conflict is to understand it in terms of
unmet needs. Some needs can be very tangible, such as a salary raise or
getting something that is owned by someone else. Or it may be about
getting someone to see your point of view. But most conflicts in our
day-to-day life are about unmet social needs; the need to be seen and
respected by others, to be accepted, to be heard and listened to and to
feel valuable. The extent to which they manifest are deeply personal and
influenced by our culture, personality, and history. These conflicts are
often hard to see and often experienced acutely by one party but not at
all by the other party.

Although light conflict is not necessarily cause for alarm, scientific
research overwhelmingly shows that all-but-the-lightest conflict has a
negative effect on the productivity of teams (De Dreu & Weingart, 2003).
This means that the ability to effectively navigate conflicts is crucial
for any group of people wanting to work together productively.

### How can we navigate conflict?

When we find ourselves in conflict with the needs or goals of others,
there are different styles for how to navigate it. The past decades,
social and organisational psychologists have converged predominantly on
the Dual Concern Model (Pruitt & Rubin, 1986). It states that when we
find ourselves in conflict, two aspects determine how we approach it
intuitively: our ability to assert our own needs and our ability to
empathize with the needs of the other(s). Based on these two dimensions,
five styles emerge:

  - We can **avoid** the conflict by withdrawing from it. This can be
    done actively, by changing the subject or by physically moving away.
    But avoidance can also be done passively by not talking about it, by
    trying to remain neutral or by avoiding certain people,
    relationships or “hot” topics;
  - We can **yield** by giving in to the other for the sake of harmony.
    This is usually driven by a fear of conflict and how hurtful they
    can be. But yielding can also take the shape of understating how
    conflict affects you, by smoothing it over or by maintaining (an
    often fake);
  - We can **force** our needs onto the other(s) by taking an aggressive
    stance with the aim to win. This can take the shape of putting
    pressure on others, issuing threats and ultimatums, insulting them
    or even using physical violence;
  - We can use **problem-solving** or **integration** to seek ways to
    resolve a conflict in a way that meets the needs of both parties.
    This takes the shape of actively confronting the conflict together
    and openly talking about it. By objectively evaluating different
    viewpoints and experiences, we often find entirely new and creative
    solutions;
  - Finally, we can **compromise** by giving everyone involved part of
    what they want, but not enough to make them truly happy with the
    outcomes. This style risks being a lazy form of the integrative
    style;

<kbd>![](https://miro.medium.com/max/3685/1*rbDXZse_BU4ISpBAd10Ijw.jpeg)</kbd>

### Which style is the best one?

Research has shown that **Integration** is the most effective way to
navigate conflict in the majority of situations (for an overview, see
Friedman et. al. 2000). Because this style takes the needs of all
parties into account, it has the highest chance of resulting in gains
for everyone. But more importantly, this style builds both the skills,
trust and an environment where further conflict can be navigated more
effectively. Research shows that groups and individuals using this style
experience less stressful conflict afterward. Contrary, the other styles
tend to result in degradation of trust, safety and an environment where
future conflict is amplified.

> “Research has shown that **Integration** is the most effective way to
> navigate conflict in the majority of situations”

### How can Liberating Structures help?

So if an integrative style is preferable, what can you do to make this
possible for yourself or in your team? We strongly believe that — among
other approaches — Liberating Structures create an environment where
people can express both their own concerns as well as listen to those of
others. These are some suggestions:

  - ‘ [Heard, Seen, Respected](http://bit.ly/33wB0qi)’ is all about
    building empathy and understanding for others when it comes to unmet
    social needs. It is a great structure to help teams build the skills
    they need to actively listen to others, as well as express where
    their social needs where unmet;
  - You can use ‘ [Integrated\~Autonomy](http://bit.ly/2P2W3xf)’ to help
    groups find solutions that allow both sides to gain, instead of just
    one or none at all;
  - You can use ‘ [TRIZ](http://bit.ly/2XAbFYW)’ to help teams playfully
    identify all the things they can do to guarantee that they won’t be
    able to navigate conflicts in such a way that everyone gains, and
    then identify what it is they already may be doing;
  - You can use ‘ [What I Need From You](http://bit.ly/2XAbDAi)’ to
    allow people to clearly express (social) needs and receive clear
    responses. Although this may be a difficult process, the clarity it
    creates builds both trust and understanding;

> “Liberating Structures create an environment where people can express
> both their own concerns as well as listen to those of others”

References

  - [Medium - Addressing The
    Elephant](https://medium.com/the-liberators/address-the-elephant-b74ae0f7b897)
  - [Medium - What science says about conflict
    styles](https://medium.com/the-liberators/what-science-says-about-conflict-styles-124246751203)
