###### [Home](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/blob/master/README.md) | [Leadership](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/tree/master/Leadership/README.md) |
------------

# Information Technology : Getting Honest Productive Feedback


According to  [research on effective
learning](http://www.columbia.edu/~mvp19/ETF/Feedback.pdf), to improve
performance, people need three things:

  - A clear goal
  - A genuine desire to achieve that goal
  - Feedback that indicates what they are doing well and what they are
    not doing well

Unfortunately,  [the feedback many leaders receive is not
helpful](https://hbr.org/2017/10/how-to-give-feedback-people-can-actually-use).
It’s often infrequent, vague, or unrelated to specific behaviors — and
as a result, leaders tend to be less proactive about getting more of it.
Low-quality feedback is not useful, positive feedback is undervalued,
and negative feedback delivered unskillfully can actually  [cause
physical
pain.](https://www.forbes.com/sites/nicolefisher/2015/12/25/rejection-and-physical-pain-are-the-same-to-your-brain/#7f72dd0b4f87)

Without clear performance targets and data measuring how close or far
they are from reaching them, leaders will continue to find it difficult
to grow and improve. When delivered thoughtfully, however, feedback can
provide leaders with the actionable data they need to become more
effective.

If you want to get the feedback that is necessary to improve your
leadership, there are a few steps you can take.

### Build and maintain a psychologically safe environment

Sharing feedback is often interpersonally risky. To increase the
likelihood of your colleagues taking that risk with you, show them that
their honesty  [won’t be met with negative
repercussions](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/268328210_Psychological_Safety_Trust_and_Learning_in_Organizations_A_Group-level_Lens).
You can do this before you ask for feedback by  [being
curious](https://hbr.org/2017/08/high-performing-teams-need-psychological-safety-heres-how-to-create-it), 
[rewarding
candor](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B01L80W8N2/ref=dp-kindle-redirect?_encoding=UTF8&btkr=1),
and showing vulnerability. Being curious starts with having the right
mindset, or believing that you have something useful to learn. It is
demonstrated by asking your teammates open-ended questions that you
really don’t know the answers to: “What could go wrong if we try this?”
When you listen to and genuinely explore your colleague’s different, and
possibly risky, perspectives — even if you disagree with them — you are
rewarding their candor. Acknowledging your weaknesses or mistakes along
the way are great ways to be open and vulnerable.

### Ask for feedback skillfully

Asking “What feedback do you have?” rarely elicits a useful response.
Instead, ask about specific events (“What did you hear when I shared my
strategy?”), worrisome patterns (“How often do I interrupt people in
meetings?”), personal impact (“How did it feel to you when I sent that
email?”), and lastly, recommendations (“What can I do to help build my
relationship with Priya?”)

### Request both positive and negative data

Clients tell me all the time that they just want to hear “the bad stuff”
when it comes to feedback. What they fail to appreciate is that positive
feedback that targets a specific behavior is useful. It tells them what
they  *don’t *need to work on, and  [increases their
motivation](https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/f08d/2df6098b0e7c03a77302af0b2824ca9f371d.pdf) to
focus on the behaviors that they do. For clarity, positive feedback is
not the same as praise. Praise tells us someone is happy with us and
thinks we are performing well. Praise sounds like: “Nice job\!”; “You
were great in that meeting.”; “Killer presentation\!” While it feels
good, praise does not give us enough information to understand what we
are doing effectively so that we can repeat the behavior.

### When receiving feedback, give your full attention and listen carefully

Eliminate distractions, including your phone and laptop, and focus fully
on the person giving the feedback. Having your phone present, even if
you’re not looking at it,  [negatively impacts relationships and reduces
your ability to connect with
others](https://psmag.com/social-justice/presence-smart-phone-lowers-quality-person-conversations-85805).
Listen carefully to what the other person is saying, resisting the
impulse to evaluate the accuracy of the message.

### Don’t debate or defend

If you find yourself disagreeing with some feedback, practice
self-awareness and notice this reaction, but do not offer contradictory
evidence or challenge your colleague. If you debate, you will look
defensive and not open to feedback, and you may decrease the likelihood
of that person offering you feedback in the future. None of these are
the outcomes you’re trying to achieve — so don’t do it.

### Own your reactions

You may feel happy, angry, confused, or frustrated by what you hear.
Recognize that your reactions are about you, and not the other person.
If you asked for feedback and someone was brave enough and generous
enough to share it with you, it’s your responsibility to own and explore
your reactions. Instead of finding fault in the messenger, become
curious about yourself. Ask: Where is this anger really coming from?
What about this is confusing? What part of the message is actually true
for me, even if I don’t want to acknowledge it?

### Demonstrate gratitude

Say thank you in a way that conveys sincere appreciation. If you’ve
heard something helpful, the person giving you feedback likely spent a
good amount of time considering your performance and how to thoughtfully
discuss it with you. They took a risk by being candid, so let them know
how much you appreciate their effort and courage.

### Reflect and evaluate

Now that you have some new data, reflect on what you’ve heard  [even if
you don’t like
reflection](https://hbr.org/2017/03/why-you-should-make-time-for-self-reflection-even-if-you-hate-doing-it).
By thinking through the meaning and implication of the feedback, you can
learn from it and consider what parts to work on, what parts to
disregard, and what parts require deeper understanding. To do this, it
helps to think about your development areas, the value you place on this
individual’s perspective, and possibly, what you have heard from others
as well. This is also the time to come back to what you may disagree
with. Given that your objective was to learn others’ perspectives on
you, ask yourself if it’s really worth the potential damage to go back
and “correct” the information. Typically, it’s not.

### Make a plan and take action

All of the steps before this set you up to make a plan and put it into
practice. Pick one or two capabilities you want to improve, get really
clear about what “improved” looks like, and then consider the steps
necessary for you to learn and adopt that new behavior. Making a plan
and taking action are not only important for your learning and
development, they’re also a signal to those who shared the feedback —
you are serious about improving and you value their perspectives.

### Sustain progress and share updates

****You need to repeat new behaviors for  [at least two
months](https://www.spring.org.uk/2009/09/how-long-to-form-a-habit.php) for
them to become new habits. If you go back to your feedback providers and
tell them what you are doing differently, you’ll give them a catalyst to
change their perspectives, validation that you heard and appreciated
what they had to say, and the opportunity to see you as a person who is
committed to your professional development.

Great leaders are great learners. Their never-ending pursuit of
information pushes them to constantly improve and sets them apart from
the rest. Getting and learning from feedback isn’t always easy, but it
is necessary, if we want to become better. It’s rare that our colleagues
will offer us the kind of feedback we need to develop, and also rare
that we respond in a way that rewards their efforts and helps us
improve. It’s worth building the skills to do this well if we want to
reach our full potential.

References

  - [Harvard Business Review - how leaders can get honest productive
    feedback](https://hbr.org/2019/01/how-leaders-can-get-honest-productive-feedback)

