###### [Home](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/blob/master/README.md) | [Leadership](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/tree/master/Leadership/README.md) |
------------

# Leadership : Giving Feedback

## Giving Feedback When You're Conflict Averse

So what do you do if you naturally avoid conflict but a big part of your
job is giving difficult performance feedback? When you’re worried about
ruffling feathers, how do you provide your direct reports with the input
they need to learn and improve?

The first step is acknowledging your conflict aversion. Have you found
yourself saying any of the following statements in the last six months?

  - *“I believe in giving people chances and investing in them so I want
    to give this more time.”*
  - *“I don’t want to crush the person when he is already working so
    hard. I need him to stay motivated.”*
  - *“My style tends to be more collegial. I prefer to roll up my
    sleeves and help out if someone is having trouble.”*
  - *“The person is so difficult, aggressive, and defensive. I hate that
    kind of conflict.”*

If so, you may be actively avoiding confrontation. Which doesn’t mean
that you have to change your core values–maintaining relationship
harmony is an important part of any job. But you will need to reframe
the way you think about tough feedback. Rather than seeing it as a
potential violation of your values, consider how it could be an
opportunity to put your values to work. Here are some tips for doing
that:

**Don’t delay and make things worse.** Although deferring a difficult
conversation can result in temporary relief, things simmer. Problems get
worse. Projects get off track or fail. We end up putting the business—or
our working relationships–at risk and potentially having to take more
dramatic action than if we had acted earlier. When you find yourself
hesitating to share feedback, ask yourself: What is the business
context? Does it require a swift decision? Be careful that in the effort
to spare the feelings of one individual, you don’t end up hurting the
morale of many others.

Or perhaps you see signs of trouble but are holding back because you
don’t fully trust your instincts. Consider what would boost your
confidence in making the call about when to give tough performance
feedback. What additional information could you collect? What objectives
are at risk? Ultimately, what are the costs if you don’t give this
feedback now?

**Be clear and open. **The good news is that your agreeable demeanor
makes it next to impossible for you to deliver feedback in a belittling
way. So don’t worry about being clear and direct. To keep your critique
from feeling personal, start by sharing the broader business context for
why the feedback matters now. Reassure the person that you know their
intentions were probably good, but that you do have some observations to
share about the effect of their actions. Provide your take on what is
happening for this person today and what needs to be different. Describe
the impact they are having now and what impact they need to have. Allow
time for them to digest the information and ask for their thoughts. Does
this resonate? What is their perspective on the issue? What are they
struggling with?

But don’t stop there. Make sure that you get concrete about the changes
you need to see (in both skills and actions) and articulate clear time
frames. Offer examples of how they might have handled the situation more
effectively. For instance, you might say, “ *With the monthly reports, I
need to see you be more proactive and show you are getting in front of
things. *Or, “ *When you bring an issue to my attention, also bring a
recommendation to show that you’ve dug into it.”*

In our attempt to avoid conflict, soft-pedaling or sugar-coating might
feel better in the moment, but if we don’t say what needs to be said,
real change will never happen.

**Get comfortable with uncomfortable emotions. **Feedback can
potentially lead to disagreement, hurt feelings, or defensiveness.
Prepare for tough conversations in advance by playing out possible
scenarios so that you’re ready for whatever may occur.

If you or the other person starts to get defensive or emotional,
acknowledge the tension and offer a break. “ *I understand how difficult
this must be. What do you need at this point in the conversation?”* Or,
* “This is challenging for both of us. I’d like to take a break and
catch up later today.” *When the going gets tough, make sure you don’t
back-pedal, change your message in an attempt to diffuse the situation,
or start talking too much to fill silences or plow through the
conversation. You want to give the person adequate time to digest what
you are saying.

If they offer new information, take it into consideration. If your
assessment and suggested course of action remain intact, stay on
message. On the other hand, if the new information could significantly
shift your view, it’s best to step back and reassess. You can say, “ *I
appreciate your sharing this information. I was not aware of it. I’d
like a chance to look into it. Let’s get together in a few days after
I’ve had a chance to learn more.”*

**Follow up. **Even if the first conversation goes well, you can always
offer to be available for further discussion to ensure a fair
resolution. Loop back to ensure an optimal outcome has been achieved,
both in preserving the message and the relationship.

Being an effective leader requires some level of stepping out of your
comfort zone and a commitment to continually improving your
communication skills. Your preference for harmony can be an asset to the
organization and to your team in the right circumstances—but it can also
backfire if you’re not careful. You can still cultivate positive
relationships by encouraging and cheering others on. But to ensure that
your people are performing at their best, you also have to know when
it’s time to give tough feedback. Stay true to yourself by delivering
it in a clear, respectful way. You may be surprised to find that on a
high-functioning team where feedback is shared honestly, conflict is
minimal.

References

  - [Harvard Business Review - Giving feedback when you're conflict averse](https://hbr.org/2015/08/giving-feedback-when-youre-conflict-averse)


