###### [Home](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/blob/master/README.md) | [Leadership](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/tree/master/Leadership/README.md) |
------------

# Leadership : Good Developers Are Practical Not Emotional

In short, it is not the problem itself but our reaction to it that
causes misery in our lives.

That said, a developer’s life can be challenging at times. Unrealistic
deadlines, overcommitting superiors, the loving code crafted by you
which does not work in production or worse still, your loving code
screwed up mercilessly by a novice developer. The situations that can
cause distress are endless.

Breaking down and letting your anger get the best of you often turn out
to be stupid and immature in most of the cases. Granted, life doesn’t
always throw us pleasantries, but also disappointments which we
definitely have to learn to deal with. On the other hand, avoiding the
problems or blaming it on others is also not a viable solution.

A developer needs to practically respond ( *stop and think about what he
needs to face*) to situations instead of reacting to them. Doing this,
we will develop the right attitude to enrich his life, despite the
challenges thrown at him.

The key is to experience uncomfortable emotions but not get stuck in
them. Emotions have the ability to cloud our judgment. And just like any
other skill, managing your emotions and being practical in times of
stress is a hallmark of a good developer.

And here are some ways in which it can be done.

### Challenge the deadlines

By challenging the deadlines, I do not mean refusing it outright or
fighting with your superior or client. Challenging means to take a
proactive solution-based tone while reacting to unreasonable deadlines.

Some of the ways can be.

  - Work backward from the deadline and map out realistically as to how
    much work can be done by you or others and by when.
  - Highlight the dependencies carefully well in advance. For example, 
    *“I can finish the code for the loans module but the ATM switch code
    needs to be in place before that.”*
  - Break the deadline up into a series of small milestones and set
    yourself a deadline for each. This will keep you motivated and on
    track towards the final deadline.
  - The key to questioning deadlines is educating yourself about the
    real purpose. Is there any pressing need for this urgency? Are they
    aware of the quality impact of the deadline? Are they lacking any
    information which they should know? Question the intent until you
    can get the real reason and suggest a solution towards it.
  - Lastly say ‘NO’ if the deadline is really unreasonable. Your
    superiors will respect you more if you insist on quality rather than
    compromising on a rush job.

Remember at the end of the day you are a professional and a professional
does the right thing always even in situations when he is under pressure
to do the wrong. Be a professional.

### Prioritize ruthlessly

Good developers know the art of prioritization very well. They don’t get
overwhelmed by urgency.

For example, you are working on getting the production code ready for
the loan origination system and the most important thing for you should
be to get the work done for the client when they are expecting it.
During your programming time, you will get several other activities like
meetings, discussion of other areas, presales discussions with
prospective clients, etc. You need to make sure that each of these
‘other’ tasks does not interfere with your ability to meet the
deadlines of the project.

An easy approach to prioritize work will be the follow the
urgency-important matrix.

  - **Urgent and Important** — Topmost priority
  - **Urgent and not important** — Calls, meetings and any activity
    which is not helping you to meet your deadline. Postpone them.
  - **Important but not urgent** — Can wait or can be delegated.
  - **Not important and not urgent** — Don’t waste your time on this.

And if interruptions go beyond your control, consider using an
‘out-of-office’ message stating that you are in an important work and
will only be available after so-and-so date. Sometimes there is no harm
to be unavailable.

### Decide to Have a Growth Mindset

Neuroscience says the only way to deal with fear: you need to face it,
head-on. When we avoid scary things we become more scared. When you face
your fears they become less frightening.

And to face fear, you need to have a growth mindset. When you are
dealing with a difficult situation, too often your confidence takes a
knock and you tend to underestimate your capability to deliver. To
counteract this, cultivate a growth mindset.

Honor the strength of your past. Remember the struggles and the effort
put in by you that made you such a great developer. Create a long list
of all of your strengths and achievements. If we respect ourselves and
honor our strengths, we automatically become stronger and wiser in times
of struggle.

And rather than focusing on the difficulties you are facing, focus on
what the experience can teach you. Make a conscious effort to absorb the
learnings rather than getting bogged down by frustration.

And remember to have a moral compass in place. Good developers have a
strong sense of right and wrong. If things are wrong, ‘stick your neck
out’ and do the right thing despite told otherwise.

### Communicate, Communicate and Communicate

Communication. It’s about honesty. It’s about treating people in the
organization as deserving to know the facts. You don’t try to give them
half the story. You don’t try to hide the story. You treat them as…as
true equals, and you communicate and communicate and communicate.

If you have important information to share with your boss, colleagues,
vendors — even if it’s not great news — don’t wait. If you put off
providing them with actionable information until it’s too late to act,
then your news will never be well received, whether it’s good or bad.

In almost every conceivable scenario, it’s to your advantage to
communicate as quickly as possible, allowing everyone involved to
understand and digest the information, formulate an appropriate
reaction, and respond accordingly. If it is bad news, your early warning
just might allow for sufficient planning to minimize the damage.

Above all, remain professional, polite, direct, and clear. Remember,
Professionalism: it’s NOT the job you DO, it’s HOW you DO the job. As a
developer, you need to do your best work even if circumstances are not
favoring it. That is your forte; your unique selling point, your
indomitable attitude and never dilute it what so ever.

Reference

  - [Levelup Gitconnected - good developers are practical not
    emotional](https://levelup.gitconnected.com/good-developers-are-practical-not-emotional-a57d04376bd2)


