###### [Home](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/blob/master/README.md) | [Leadership](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/tree/master/Leadership/README.md) |
------------


# Leadership : Handle Conflicts

<kbd>![](https://miro.medium.com/max/2400/1*pE3BsygzHhHXOpD89WZaSQ.png)</kbd>

## Communication

If you reflect back upon conflicts you have encountered over the years,
you’ll quickly recognize many of them resulted from a lack of
information, poor information, no information, or misinformation. Let’s
assume for a moment that you were lucky enough to have received good
information, but didn’t know what to do with it…That is still a
communication problem, which in turn can lead to conflict. Clear,
concise, accurate, and timely communication of information will help to
ease both the number and severity of conflicts.

## Emotions

Another common mistake made in  workplace communications which leads to
conflict is letting emotions drive decisions. I have witnessed otherwise
savvy executives place the need for emotional superiority ahead of
achieving their mission (not that they always understood this at the
time). Case in point - have you ever witnessed an employee throw a fit
of rage and draw the regrettable  *line in the sand* in the heat of the
moment? If you have, what you really watched was a person indulging
their emotions rather than protecting their future.

The very bane of human existence, which is in fact human nature itself,
will always create gaps in thinking & philosophy,  and no matter how
much we all wish it wasn’t so…it is. So the question then becomes how to
effectively deal with conflict when it arises. It is essential for
organizational health and performance that conflict be accepted and
addressed through effective conflict resolution processes. While having
a conflict resolution structure is important, effective utilization of
conflict resolution processes is ultimately dependant upon the ability
of all parties to understand the benefits of conflict resolution, and
perhaps more importantly, their desire to resolve the matter. The
following tips will help to more effective handle conflicts in the
workplace:

### Define Acceptable Behavior

You know what they say about assuming…Just having a definition for what
constitutes acceptable behavior is a positive step in avoiding conflict.
Creating a framework for decisioning, using a published delegation of
authority statement, encouraging sound business practices in
collaboration, team building, leadership development, and talent
management will all help avoid conflicts. Having clearly defined job
descriptions so that people know what’s expected of them, and a well
articulated chain of command to allow for effective communication will
also help avoid conflicts. Clearly and publicly make it known what will
and won't be tolerated.

### Hit Conflict Head-on

While you can’t always prevent conflicts, it has been my experience that
the secret to conflict resolution is in fact conflict prevention where
possible. By actually seeking out areas of potential conflict and
proactively intervening in a just and decisive fashion you will likely
prevent certain conflicts from ever arising. If a conflict does flair
up, you will likely minimize its severity by dealing with it quickly.
Time spent identifying and understanding natural tensions will help to
avoid unnecessary conflict.

If the conflict is not personal, don’t make it personal. Put your focus
on the problem and finding ways to solve that problem. You can’t change
the person, and you will likely continue working with them. Even if you
don’t want to be friends with the person, keep your focus on the problem
without making it a personal issue.

  - It’s easy to feel personally attacked for something, especially if
    it’s regarding your work. Do your best to not take things personally
    and keep everything within the lens of your work.

### Understanding the WIIFM Factor

Understanding the other professionals WIIFM (What’s In It For Me)
position is critical. It is absolutely essential to understand other’s
motivations prior to weighing in. The way to avoid conflict is to help
those around you achieve their objectives. If you approach conflict from
the perspective of taking the action that will help others best achieve
their goals you will find few obstacles will stand in your way with
regard to resolving conflict.

### The Importance Factor

Pick your battles and avoid conflict for the sake of conflict. However
if the issue is important enough to create a conflict then it is surely
important enough to resolve. If the issue, circumstance, or situation is
important enough, and there is enough at stake, people will do what is
necessary to open lines of communication and close positional and/or
philosophical gaps.

### View Conflict as Opportunity

Hidden within virtually every conflict is the potential for a tremendous
teaching/learning opportunity. Where there is disagreement there is an
inherent potential for growth and development. If you’re a CEO who
doesn’t leverage conflict for team building and leadership development
purposes you’re missing a great opportunity. Divergent positions
addressed properly can stimulate innovation and learning in ways like
minds can't even imagine. Smart leaders look for the upside in all
differing opinions.

## Embrace Conflict

When conflict arises, don’t avoid it or pretend nothing has happened. As
time goes on, tension will build -- and the conflict only will get
worse. Deal with these uncomfortable issues as soon as possible, before
problems and bad feelings become embedded in everyday work.

If you notice a conflict between employees, encourage them to find a way
to work it out. If conflict develops between two teams, it's a good time
to improve [interdepartmental
communication](https://wiki.pinnacle.com/display/IT/Improve+Interdepartmental+Communication).
If you have a conflict with one of your employee, address it head on and
in private. 

Pretending that nothing is wrong isn’t the way to handle a conflict.
Begin by admitting there’s a problem that needs resolution. Acknowledge
the conflict and the roles you and the other person have played in
creating or sustaining the problem. Be honest with yourself about your
own role in the situation.
<sup>[\[2\]](https://m.wikihow.com/Resolve-a-Conflict-at-Work#_note-2)</sup>

  - Think about what factors are influencing the problem, such as
    scheduling, personality conflicts, feeling overworked, or disrupting
    some kind of perceived pecking order.
    <sup>[\[3\]](https://m.wikihow.com/Resolve-a-Conflict-at-Work#_note-3)</sup>
  - Look at not only your side, but the other side as well. Looking at
    both sides can help you understand the problem from both
    perspectives

## Talk Together

Set up a time and place so you can talk for an extended span without
outside interruptions.

When you do meet, each person should have adequate time to say what he
or she believes the other party needs to hear. Don't let any individual
monopolize the conversation or control the topic. Each person should
talk about the disagreements and how he or she feels about the
situation.

Remember, this is not the time to attack or assign blame. Focus on the
problem, not your opinion of the other person’s character.

## Listen Carefully

It's essential to give your complete attention to the person who is
talking. Do not interrupt the other person.

Make sure you're getting the message he or she intends to send. Rephrase
and repeat back what you've heard to confirm understanding. You might
say something along the lines of, “Let me make sure I understand. You’re
upset about \_\_\_\_\_ because \_\_\_\_\_.”

Ask clarifying questions if needed. You can request that the other
person repeat a central idea or reword his or her frustrations in a way
that makes sense to you. 

Listening always should be about gaining understanding. Don’t let
yourself become reactionary to the other person's words.

Everything in the workplace involves communication, which is  [critical
for efficiency and
effectiveness](https://money.usnews.com/money/blogs/outside-voices-careers/articles/2017-04-19/how-to-effectively-communicate-at-work).
However, not everyone naturally knows  [how to listen
well](https://health.usnews.com/health-news/health-wellness/articles/2013/08/21/how-to-be-a-good-listener).

There are three levels of listening:

  - Internal listening: You're paying attention to your own inner voice,
    opinion, judgment and needs. For example, "That sounds hard" or "I'm
    hungry." This also includes thinking about what you want to say
    next.
  - Focused listening: You're focusing on the other person. This means
    not only listening to each word but also being aware of non-verbal
    communication and nuances.
  - Global listening: You're focusing on the energy and tone between you
    and your conversation partner and are aware of shifts in attitude.

To incorporate all of these levels of listening when managing conflict
in the workplace, first set the tone of the conversation. Let your
employee or co-worker know you want to talk about a touchy subject. Ask
for permission to discuss the issue. Then, be quiet and calm and go
through the problem slowly. Try asking questions rather than giving
advice. Notice how that changes the tone of the conversation.

Try to reduce your internal listening and develop your focused listening
skills. What is your co-worker not saying that you might miss? What has
she been saying that you've missed so far?

To improve your listening skills, have a close friend or family member
describe a problem with which he or she is struggling. Then, reflect
what he or she says and paraphrase without asking questions or giving
advice. This exercise will train you to be a better listener.

Make a commitment today to begin more active listening tomorrow. Also,
develop a plan to adjust the relationship agreements you have with a
co-worker if the current tone and boundaries aren't working.

## Find Agreement

Your conversation primarily will focus on the disagreements, but
resolution is possible only when you find points of agreement. You
should emerge from the experience with some positives instead of all
negatives.

Shed light on commonalities. Share examples or instances in which you
agree with the other person or can see another point of view. For
example, if you disagree on new sales tactics, you might share what you
liked about the other person’s idea or the motivation to work harder for
the team.

Looking for agreement demonstrates your willingness to seek out common
ground and build a relationship around those trust elements.

## Provide Guidance

If you're in a leadership position, there are times  [you may need to
mediate work
conflict](http://smallbusiness.patriotsoftware.com/how-handle-conflict-at-work-communication/?utm_source=ENT45&utm_medium=article&utm_campaign=GBL&utm_content=work_conflict).
Don’t take sides, ever. Realize you are there simply to help your
employees work out their problems.

You might need to guide the conversation. And if hurt feelings run high,
it's likely you'll need to redirect the topic so your employees return
to the real problem. If you're in a position to give advice on next
steps, highlight the positive aspects of the process and suggest related
topics or actions they can work through after the meeting.

## Be quick to forgive

Every conflict needs a clear resolution that acknowledges hurt feelings
and finds a solution that begins to mend them. 

Apologize. Tell the other person you're truly sorry for any ill words or
actions -- and mean it. You'll also need to forgive the other person.
Agreeing solely for the sake of appearances can lead to grudges that
deepen over time, undoing any progress you've made together.

## Working at different paces

Employees get tasks done at different speeds. Some people on your 
[payroll](https://www.patriotsoftware.com/payroll/) work faster or
slower than others, which can cause conflict in a team. Some of your
workers might become frustrated with the varying paces. And, your
operations might not run as smoothly as possible when everyone is
working on a different timeline.

In business, there is such a thing as working too slow. You need to
produce and sell a certain number of products or services to increase
your  [bottom line in
business](https://www.patriotsoftware.com/accounting/training/blog/what-is-bottom-line-business-management/).
Working at a slower rate could cost your business.

If employees work slower than an appropriate speed for your operations,
check to see what’s going on. The worker might just need an extra push
of motivation to pick up the pace. Or, the employee might be struggling
with a task and need your help.

An employee’s work might suffer because they think they need to work
lightning-fast. Explain to the employee that they can slow down and
focus on their tasks. Simple evaluations and conversations often solve
time-based issues.

To keep your team coordinated, set deadlines. That way, employees can be
team players and know when they are expected to complete work. Tasks
progress smoothly when workers can expect completion times.

## Different perspectives

A diverse workforce offers many benefits to a small business. You gain
new ways of looking at your operations, customers, and problem solving.
Different backgrounds can also make the workday more interesting and
enjoyable. But, sometimes, conflicts can arise when employees don’t see
eye-to-eye.

Often, the issues stem from misunderstandings between employees. Each
worker has a different set of experiences that shapes their way of
thinking. As a leader in your business, you should help employees share
their perspectives with each other.

To promote  [teamwork in the
workplace](https://smallbusiness.patriotsoftware.com/build-teamwork-in-workplace-tips/),
hold events that let employees get to know each other. For example, you
could host a holiday party or company picnic that aid in resolving team
conflict. Employees can see where others are coming from and understand
their co-workers’ choices.

## Confusion about the brand

Employees are great ambassadors for brand awareness. That is—when they
understand your company’s message. If a worker doesn’t get the
business’s brand, conflict in a team can happen. Your workforce needs
to be on the same page.

In 2012, 
[Gallup](http://news.gallup.com/businessjournal/156197/employees-don-brand.aspx) asked
more than 3,000 randomly-selected workers if they agreed with the
statement, “I know what my company stands for and what makes our
brand(s) different from our competitors.” Twenty-four percent of the
participants responded that they disagreed.

The survey data above shows that many workers do not understand their
business’s brand. You need to convey your brand to employees so they can
function as a team with your company’s values.

Introduce your brand to employees during the  [onboarding
process](https://www.patriotsoftware.com/payroll/training/blog/successfully-onboarding-new-employees/).
Include the brand message in your  [employee
handbook](https://www.patriotsoftware.com/payroll/training/blog/what-is-the-benefit-of-an-employee-handbook/) and
training practices. Tell your business’s story to your team and get
employees involved.

## Poor communication

When it comes to a well-organized team, communication is key. Employees
need to know how to communicate with each other throughout the workday.
But, workers communicate in different ways.

To handle conflict in your team, turn your business into one that
welcomes communication. Managing conflict through communication means
making employees comfortable with sharing their ideas, feelings, and
thoughts. Your team will accomplish more when you work together and
foster connections.

Make it easy for employees to communicate with one another. Use team
collaboration tools so that employees can share information on the
internet. Provide cell phones for workers who work out of the office a
lot. Make employee work contact numbers and information available to
your team.

In some businesses and industries, you use technical terms. A new
employee might not be familiar with the terms your team uses to
communicate. It’s important for you to teach new hires the vocabulary
they need to know to complete tasks while onboarding.

## Designing the Relationship

Designing the relationship means creating an agreement with a co-worker
or employee to work together more effectively. This includes
establishing guidelines for communicating, accomplishing tasks and
having meetings. This also includes setting boundaries and determining
how to handle feedback and disagreements up front.  [Talking about work
problems
openly](https://money.usnews.com/money/careers/company-culture/articles/2018-05-09/how-to-communicate-about-a-work-problem),
when things are calm and stable, will enable you to handle the difficult
times during the relationship.

To start, think about what makes you more willing to be open in a
professional relationship. These elements may include trust, respect or
mutual vulnerability (in a way that is reasonable for a professional
setting). Identify which of these three areas you struggle with and
develop relevant action items for the next month.

For example, a fellow co-worker or employee may feel more open if you
allow him the opportunity to express himself first regarding a project
or a task before you tell him your thoughts.

Next, create a checklist to work through with your co-worker, employee
or client that includes the following:

  - Objectives/tasks you need to achieve.
  - Roles you should each play in your relationship based on your
    strengths.
  - Challenges you have encountered previously and may encounter again,
    and how to handle them going forward.
  - Milestones you need to achieve for your project or task.
  - Ground rules for meetings and communication.

Finally, think about what the difficult employee or co-worker may need.
Generally, we need to feel trust, compassion, stability and hope in our
professional relationships. If you can pinpoint what quality the person
needs more of, this could help you prevent conflict at work.

These steps to design the relationship empower each person to take
responsibility and establish clear boundaries for positive
collaboration.

## Having Difficult Conversations When You Don’t Like Conflict

Avoiding or delaying a difficult conversation can hurt your
relationships and create other negative outcomes. It may not feel
natural at first, especially if you dread discord, but you can learn to
dive into these tough talks by reframing your thoughts.

**Begin from a place of curiosity and respect, and stop worrying about
being liked. **Conflict avoiders are often worried about their 
*likability*. While it’s natural to want to be liked, that’s not always
the most important thing. Lean into the conversation with an open
attitude and a genuine desire to learn. Start from a place of curiosity
and respect — for both yourself and the other person. Genuine respect
and vulnerability typically produce more of the same: mutual respect and
shared vulnerability. Even when the subject matter is difficult,
conversations can remain mutually supportive. Respect the other person’s
point of view, and expect them to respect yours.

**Focus on what you’re hearing, not what you’re saying. **People who shy
away from conflict often spend a huge amount of time mentally rewording
their thoughts. Although it might feel like useful preparation,
ruminating over what to say can hijack your mind for the entire workday
and sometimes even late into the night. And tough conversations rarely
go as planned anyway. So take the pressure off yourself. You don’t
actually need to talk that much during a difficult conversation.
Instead, focus on listening, reflecting, and observing. For example, if
a team member has missed another deadline, approach them by asking
neutral, supportive questions: “I see the project is behind schedule.
Tell me about the challenges you’re facing.” Then listen. Pause. Be
interested and proactive. Gather as much detail as possible. Ask
follow-up questions without blame.

Your genuine attention and neutrality encourage people to elaborate. For
every statement the other person makes, mirror back what they’ve said,
to validate that you understand them correctly.

References

  - [Medium  - What science says about conflict
    styles](https://medium.com/the-liberators/what-science-says-about-conflict-styles-124246751203)
  - [Forbes - 5 keys to dealing with workplace
    conflict](https://www.forbes.com/sites/mikemyatt/2012/02/22/5-keys-to-dealing-with-workplace-conflict/#357d9e901e95)
  - [Entrepreneur - 6 Strategies to Resolve Conflict at
    Work](https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/303617)
  - [Small Business Patriot Software - How handle conflict at work
    communication](https://smallbusiness.patriotsoftware.com/how-handle-conflict-at-work-communication/?utm_source=ENT45&utm_medium=article&utm_campaign=GBL&utm_content=work_conflict)
  - [Money usnews - how to handle conflict in the
    workplace](https://money.usnews.com/money/blogs/outside-voices-careers/articles/how-to-handle-conflict-in-the-workplace)
  - [Harvard Business Review - how to have difficult conversations when
    you don't like
    conflict](https://hbr.org/2017/05/how-to-have-difficult-conversations-when-you-dont-like-conflict)


