###### [Home](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/blob/master/README.md) | [Leadership](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/tree/master/Leadership/README.md) |
------------

# Leadership : Improve Interdepartmental Communication

## The importance of Interdepartmental Communication

Interdepartmental communication is communication between a business’s
departments. Departments might need to talk about shared projects, new
promotions, changes in goods or services,  [sales
projections](https://www.patriotsoftware.com/accounting/training/blog/sales-projections-small-business-owners/),
or anything else that might affect multiple departments.
Interdepartmental communication can be as simple as a departmental email
update or a more complex meeting about a shared project.

Communication between departments is sometimes called cross-departmental
communication.

If your business has multiple departments or even just employees who do
vastly different tasks, you must be aware of interdepartmental
communication. Even at small businesses, where it’s easier to
communicate with co-workers, there are ways to improve communication
between departments.

### What is interdepartmental communication?

Interdepartmental communication is communication between a business’s
departments. Departments might need to talk about shared projects, new
promotions, changes in goods or services,  [sales
projections](https://www.patriotsoftware.com/accounting/training/blog/sales-projections-small-business-owners/),
or anything else that might affect multiple departments.
Interdepartmental communication can be as simple as a departmental email
update or a more complex meeting about a shared project.

Communication between departments is sometimes called cross-departmental
communication.

### The importance of interdepartmental communication

Your business will perform better when your teams communicate with each
other.

Effective interdepartmental communication keeps information moving. A
team doesn’t keep all its information to itself. Instead, it shares
information with other teams so everyone can do their best work.

For example, when your marketing department begins advertising a new
promotion, the marketing team should tell the sales department. The
sales department needs to know about the promotion, such as the start
and end dates, so it can make sure customers receive the deal they saw.
If the sales team doesn’t know the details, there will likely be
frustrated customers.

Once the sales team makes a sale, it must communicate with the people
who handle  [accounts
receivable](https://www.patriotsoftware.com/accounting/training/blog/what-are-accounts-receivable/).
If they don’t know about the sale, they won’t know that they need to
collect money, and your business will lose income.

Customers receive better service when your business has good
interdepartmental communication. When teams communicate, everyone has
the same service, offerings, and billing.

When people or entire departments are only focused on speed and
self-promotion, communication will break down. Important information
will not travel. People will lack the knowledge to best complete their
tasks. Customers will not receive the best service. And when customers
aren’t served well, they’ll take their money elsewhere.

Lack of communication can lead to conflict. People will fight. Teams
will distrust each other. Finger pointing will happen as teams blame
each other for mistakes and inefficiency.

Your business must develop positive interdepartmental communication to
prevent conflict, increase efficiency, and satisfy customers.

## How to improve Interdepartmental Communcation

Improving interdepartmental communication can benefit your business. Use
these interdepartmental communication strategies to get your employees
talking.

<kbd>![How to Improve Interdepartmental Communication Infographic](https://smallbusiness.patriotsoftware.com/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2017/07/interdepartmental_communication.2.jpg)</kbd>

### Build relationships

Employees should build relationships with people outside of their
departments. Stronger relationships increase trust, which leads to an
improved ability to work together.

Employees might grow relationships by inviting co-workers for coffee or
lunch. They might also do activities together after work.

You can organize events where employees can get to know each other. You
can host holiday parties, seasonal get-togethers, or achievement
celebrations. Encourage employees to talk to people outside of their
departments. To promote interdepartmental mingling, you can assign
seating.

### Meet regularly

Encourage your employees to meet regularly. If you need to, schedule
regular times when employees across departments can meet.

When employees meet, they should seek out ways to help each other.
Employees should share their needs. They can ask co-workers to help on
projects.

Train employees to think about others, not just themselves. Selflessness
will promote communication and cooperation between departments.

### Create action items

Communication shouldn’t end when an interdepartmental meeting ends.

Meetings shouldn’t just be information dumps where employees spew facts
about what they’re working on. Your employees should use meetings to
also create goals and action items.

Employees should leave the meeting with tasks that will help their
co-workers and improve the business. Employees can divide up tasks, or
you can assign tasks to each person.

### Use familiar terms

Each department uses their own terminology. While everyone in the
department might know what the terms mean, it might be jargon to
employees in other departments. Unfamiliar terms can cause confusion and
alienate those who don’t understand.

When employees from different departments work together, they should
explain their terminology. In some cases, it might be better to leave
behind departmental terms and use other words that are familiar to
everyone.

### Remove physical barriers

Sometimes, communication can struggle if there are physical barriers in
the way. For example, if one or all of your employees work remotely,
it’ll be more difficult to have regular communication.  [Flexible work
arrangements](https://www.patriotsoftware.com/payroll/training/blog/the-benefits-of-flexible-work-schedules/) can
be great for individuals, but bad for teams if the proper systems aren’t
in place.

Give employees the things they need to communicate effectively. If you
have remote employees, make sure everyone has access to email, online
chat tools, and video conferencing software. For employees in your
workplace, make sure they have meeting places where they won’t disturb
others.

### Focus on company needs

Your employees will be tempted to think about themselves and ways they
can grow. They will want to compete for personal advancement. When
employees are competing against each other, they won’t have strong
communication. They will only communicate when it helps themselves.

Teach your employees to think about the business’s needs. Make sure they
regularly think about how to advance and improve your business. Show
employees that there isn’t an “us vs. them” battle. Instead, there is
only the company and what is best for it.

When employees are focused on the single goal to improve the business,
they will work better together.

References

  - <https://smallbusiness.patriotsoftware.com/what-is-interdepartmental-communication-strategies/?utm_source=ENT45&utm_medium=article&utm_campaign=GBL&utm_content=work_conflict>

