###### [Home](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/blob/master/README.md) | [Leadership](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/tree/master/Leadership/README.md) |
------------

# Leadership : Influence at Work

## Influences

Advancing our careers can be a challenge. Especially, in the banking
industry where the culture and complexity can slow you down and zap your
motivation. Perhaps you don't like the money you make. Or maybe you want
a different role. Or you want to work on more interesting projects. I've
written this article to show you how learning to persuade like an
entrepreneur leads to work happiness.

Research has gathered intelligence on what you must do to successfully
sell people on your ideas. Here are the top techniques they don't teach
you at business schools (unless you are training in my mindset
workshop). If you are in a sales role you will recognize many of these.
If you are not, consider this a peek into the psychology of persuasion.

1.  **Rational persuasion**: The most effective way to sell your ideas
    is to use logical arguments and explanations to prove to others your
    proposal is the best course of action. This requires networking
    within the organization to learn as much about the OKRs as possible
    and being able to show how your approach is the most feasible and
    viable way to solve for them.
2.  **Inspiration Appeal**: Sometimes you need engagement from peers and
    subordinates - to get them on board with an idea - so you can
    successfully complete a task. Getting them enthused by appealing to
    their values, aspirations, and ideals, or giving them a confidence
    boost can be effective. But, the approach will only resonate if your
    audience really believes you.
3.  **Ingratiation**: You don't need to work in cognitive science or
    behavioral economics to know that flattery and praise can get you
    everywhere. The important thing here is not to fake it. You should
    maintain healthy respect for your audience, ensure it comes from a
    place of empathy, and use your emotional intelligence to monitor how
    it is received.
4.  **Collaboration**: We in the management consulting business use this
    tactic when we offer to "show clients how to do something" while we
    work on their project. If the learning is something your target
    values, this approach is a good way to provide additional value to
    your proposal.
5.  **Coalition**: This tactic is about seeking help from others to help
    influence the decision by the leaders you are targeting with your
    proposal. There is a right way and a wrong way to do this. If your
    efforts come across as "ganging-up" on your target, your personal
    branding among executives and management will take a devastating
    blow. The key to this approach is to think like a fintech startup
    attempting to get product market fit and use your networking skills
    to gather insight and facts as well as support for your idea from
    others. Then use the information to inform a more sound rational
    argument for your proposal.
6.  **Consultation**: This tactic is closely related with coalition.
    But, it is primarily done with your target: your boss, or the people
    you are trying to persuade. In this situation, you seek their
    participation in planning your proposal. This helps develop a
    favorable attitude and commitment because they had a hand in
    designing it. This is the primary advocate creating outcome of
    design thinking and innovation projects.



## Be Kind

### Kindness Saves Everyone Time, Money, and Energy

Hiring a developer costs a lot of money, but the cost of training that
developers in company tools, coding standards, and business knowledge is
infinitely higher. After a year, if your developer wants to go
elsewhere, then it’s a whole lot of money wasted.

If your developer isn’t happy, projects don’t go smoothly either. The
implicit cost in delays to project timelines, code that needs to be
refactored excessively, and bugs that should’ve been ironed out is
enormous.

Keeping a developer who isn’t happy is doing the developer disservice,
too. If a developer has already outgrown the role, then trying to keep
them is like trying to keep overflowing water contained. It’s an effort
better made by simply letting the developer go and finding the right
level of developer as a replacement. Be honest. Tell the developer that
they’ve outgrown the role, and suggest another career path to pursue.
It’s not only good karma to help someone through good mentoring.
You’re also making a valuable connection.

### Kindness Is a Two-Way Street

If management is making every effort to be kind, and you as a developer
are still not happy, then you need to reflect on why. This may be due to
burnout. This may be due to other issues: unclear goals, work-life
balance, personal stress, career direction, etc.

**Developers are also responsible for communicating these issues to
management without overreactions.**

If you just feel “blah” no matter how easy your life is, then get a
mentor. Most development teams already have senior developers mentoring
junior developers on technical issues.

But, if it’s a work-life issue and you’re a junior developer who doesn’t
feel like talking about “soft” issues with your technical mentor, then
talk to someone else who has had more life experience than you. This
could be your parents, your siblings, your friends, people in
programming life forums, or a product manager at work. For minorities,
there are organizations for female programmers, programmers of a
specific ethnicity, programmers of certain gender preferences. Seek
these organizations out. Be proactive.

**Developers and management have to meet halfway. Otherwise, the
relationship isn’t going to work.**

### Kindness Is in the Small Gestures

Being kind isn’t about grand gestures. The small ones are the ones that
are often the most appreciated.

### Headphones

If your workplace is a dynamic, noisy environment, just buy your
developer some headphones. At the very least, allow your developer to
use headphones at the workplace. Programming is an activity that
requires a lot of concentration. Keeping noise out and being able to
focus is essential.

### Leave your developer alone

Once you get your programmer headphones, stop the product manager from
coming over to talk to your programmer every hour. Put processes into
place so that all details for programming tasks, testing tasks, and
required tasks are documented and ironed out in a meeting. Most
companies just use a morning standup to check statuses and ask
questions. This should be enough until weekly meetings.

Protect your developer’s “flow.”

### Minimize health risks

A set of ergonomic seat cushions or an exercise ball are great ways to
relieve the developer’s stress at sitting for long periods of time. At
the same time, healthy food in the cafeteria and pantry and access to a
sports gym are a must. Ask your programmer about their preferences for a
monitor, keyboard, and mouse. Then, get the right ones. Some developers
prefer working on their laptops.

### Improve ratios for diversity

Try to eliminate the “I’m the only one” scenario. If you hire one female
programmer, then hire two. If you hire one minority programmer, then
hire two. If you hire one offshore programmer, then hire two. It’s
always better to have better ratios within the same team so that their
social, cultural needs can be met.

### Manage layoffs

Business is hard and sometimes there’s a need for layoffs or to hire on
a cheaper workforce. Just call a staffing agency for the developer that
you’re about to layoff. Try to get your developer at least an interview
elsewhere. Developers can also be married with kids. Don’t tell them
they haven’t performed up to standard when they had stellar performance
reviews. Just be honest and say that the business environment changed.
“It’s not you, it’s me.”

### Open communication

Don’t punish your developers for speaking to you openly about personal
matters that may be causing issues in their lives. I had a manager who
asked me to take a gap year or a sabbatical when I was going through a
divorce. Her words were, “Your job will be here when you get back.” Now,
that’s a kind gesture.

### Mandatory vacations

It’s hard for introverted developers who love to program to go and do
something else. As a manager, make it mandatory. Even if your developer
stays home for a vacation, that’s OK. There’s no right way of taking a
vacation. But, just remind the developer to get some rest. If your
developer comes to you and says they want a three-day weekend every two
weeks instead of taking a consecutive two-week vacation, then see if
that’s possible. It’s not the end of the world for you, and it may be a
big deal for your developer.

### Minimize unhealthy competition

On a team, deadlines will compete for your developer’s attention plenty.
Your developer doesn’t need additional pressure to feel bad about
themselves. Try to ask your developers to support each other. Let your
developers be specific experts in their domains. Appreciate them for
their expertise, and use standups as opportunities to appreciate
developers, too.

### Encourage humor

When deadlines are tight and everyone’s feeling burned out and
exhausted, it’s time to have some humor about the situation. Keep the
workplace professional, but don’t forget that humor can be used
strategically to lighten people’s moods. Be sensitive to your
developer’s moods. Programming is often a creative endeavor. In
creativity, programmers can suffer from both high and low mood swings.
So, offer a joke now and then.

### Good faith negotiations

At any job, managers are constantly negotiating with developers about
time, resources, and requirements. You’ll have to negotiate about
compensation. To facilitate good-faith negotiation, just be open and
honest about your needs and wants. Don’t use “back-handed” ways to make
your developers “submit.” The developer who will give you optimal
productivity is a happy developer who’s passionate about working for you
and the company.

## Motivation

### Autonomy, mastery and purpose.

Daniel Pink, author of “ [Drive: The Surprising Truth About What
Motivates
Us](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1594484805/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=1594484805&linkCode=as2&tag=thedaipos05-20&linkId=7FHFKXSJF3UWUHF7),”
has found that we’re motivated by three things:Autonomy: People want to
have control over their own work. Instead of being a “helicopter boss,”
give your employees the chance to make decisions. For example, if you
have weekly meetings, at least have your team decide the topic or select
the snacks that will be present.Mastery: Everyone wants to get better at
what they do. Provide opportunities to  [show your employees how they’ve
progressed](https://www.forbes.com/sites/steveolenski/2015/07/20/8-key-tactics-for-developing-employees/#41f7fa3d6373).
Give constructive feedback, provide performance metrics, and create
individual development plans.Purpose: People want to be a part of
something that is bigger than themselves. Show how their work has
benefited the business. And, more importantly, show how their work has
aligned with their values.

### Offer specific and sincere praise.

There’s no such thing as too giving too much recognition and praise to
your employees. A simple “thank you” note or shout-out during a meeting
should suffice. Just make sure that you’re acknowledging tangible
accomplishments.In other words, you need to quantify accomplishments by
looking at  [specific
metrics](https://www.livecareer.com/quintessential/quantifying-accomplishments).
This could include sales volume, contracts/bids won, amount of customers
retained, or increase in profitability.

### Develop a community.

[By building a sense of
community ](https://due.com/blog/establishing-company-culture/)your
employees feel connected to each other - and not just to the
business.Online forums can be used, but you can’t replace old-fashioned
in-person interaction. Encourage your team to eat lunch together. Play
games to go everyone a break. Hold a conference or just throw a party to
celebrate reaching a milestone.By developing a community also influences
after-hours bonding. That’s why you should always invite employees and
their families to events like company picnics.

### Engage your employees in the incentive process.

If you aren’t sure what will motivate your team, don’t be afraid to just
ask them. For example, ask them what kinds of rewards they would like to
receive through surveys, brainstorming sessions, a suggestion box, or
questions during employee reviews.Once you’ve gathered your employee
feedback, you can create clear goals for them to strive for. Not only
will this increase your business’ bottom line, it communicates the value
for employee contributions. That itself should motivate them to
participate in the incentive program.

### Get to know them as people.

What are their hobbies and interests? Do they have any children or pets?
When you build personal relationships with your staff, you can find out
what makes them tick. For example, if they don’t like working late
because of they have a dog, then consider allowing employees to being
their dogs to work.More importantly, when you show genuine interest in
them, they’ll do their best not to let you down.

### Offer flexibility.

Offering flexible work schedules allows your employees to maintain a 
[healthy work-life
balance](https://due.com/blog/work-life-balance-look-like/). This is
because it allows them to meet family needs, personal obligations, and
life responsibilities. Additionally, it lets them avoid commuting to
work, reduces stress, and gives them a chance to work when they’re most
productive.

### Stay connected.

Frequently keep in touch with your employees. Thanks to the
proliferation of email, texting, social media, and apps like Slack
communication has never been easier.Staying connected with your team
allows you to offer training and tips that can improve their work. It
also lets you share relevant and timely information like the latest
updates on the business. Just don’t cross the line by communicating with
them 24/7.

### Provide perks and privileges.

Again, work-life quality is important to employees. When healthy,
they’ll work harder and smarter because their workdays are more
pleasurable and rewarding. If flexible schedules aren’t working for
everyone, then give them a chance to earn work-from-home days.Besides
flexibility, provide preferred parking spots, longer lunches, or the
opportunity to spend time on passion projects or tasks they enjoy.
Remember, when employees enjoy their work, they’re more productive - and
that’s great for your bottom line.

### Volunteer together.

Does anything brings a group closer together than spending time sorting
canned goods at the local food bank or raising donations for a
nonprofit? I don’t think so. In fact, that’s why we’re seeing more and
more businesses encourage volunteerism.It’s not only good PR,
volunteering increases productivity, boosts cooperation, and attracts
and retains employees. Just remember to select volunteer opportunities
that your employees are passionate about. Asking them through a survey
is a simply way to find this out.

### Offer the opportunity for employees to learn desired skills.

People get stuck in a rut when they perform the same work tasks day-in
and day-out. When you’re in a rut, it’s easy to become less motivated,
creative, and dissatisfied with your jobs. As a result, you can expect
lowered productivity and higher turnover.You can change that around by
rewarding your exceptional employees with time during the workday to
learn any new skills that interests them. It’s a simple way to enhance
their job satisfaction, improve output, and increase their abilities
that they can use to improve your business. References

  - [LinkedIn - how sell your ideas work cosmo
    mariano](https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/how-sell-your-ideas-work-cosmo-mariano/)
  - [Linkedin - 10 tips motivate employees without resorting money john
    rampton](https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/10-tips-motivate-employees-without-resorting-money-john-rampton)
  - [Medium - 10 ways to be kind to your developers without saying a
    word](https://medium.com/better-programming/10-ways-to-be-kind-to-your-developers-without-saying-a-word-868a04f53603)

