###### [Home](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/blob/master/README.md) | [Leadership](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/tree/master/Leadership/README.md) |
------------

# Information Technology : Key to Leadership

<kbd>![Top Leadership Qualities Every Manager Can't Live Without by TINYpulse](https://www.tinypulse.com/hs-fs/hubfs/The_Beginners_Guide_to_Great_Leadership.png?width=650&name=The_Beginners_Guide_to_Great_Leadership.png)</kbd>

## Company Culture

<kbd>![](attachments/451819861/463532152.png)</kbd>

You might not have heard of this one very often. Surprised to find this
to be at the top of our list? Having a sense of company culture can make
or break your place as a successful manager. Let’s just say this is the
secret sauce to the recipe of the perfect mix for a great manager.

If you as a manager can align your managerial processes with it to
uplift the company culture; you have hacked most of your
how-to-be-a-great-manager already. It includes all the shared values,
beliefs and practices by the company.

## Lead By Example

This goes for anyone and everyone, not just for managers — but
especially for managers.

> “Actions speak louder than words,” they say, and rightly so\!

Effective managers ought to demonstrate strong work ethics they wish to
see in his/her employees too. This one should go without saying.

## Accountability

As a manager, you have to, not only create accountability in yourself
but also demonstrate it yourself. No matter the consequences of the task
performed take responsibility for whatever happens—good or bad.

## Sustained Focus

Over long haul work, the team’s focus can deter and diverge in face of
obstacles or simply because the project is too long. As a manager, it is
up to you to  [keep your team
focused](https://dzone.com/articles/how-to-manage-your-time-and-focus-on-what-really-m) and
their attention converged. This goes especially for any manager running
an agile team with sprint work.

Stay focused\! Get the work done efficiently and fruitfully.

## Working Together Works

Work on cultivating a family environment among your employees. Create a
sense of belonging to the group. This would ensure stronger teamwork. If
you pace your work forwards as a team with the motto “working together
works” it will make your workplace a home away from home for your
employees.

Everyone’s work would mean to stand essential and they would put in the
required effort to get it done—knowing that without everyone’s part the
project would fail.

## Grit

Angela Lee Duckworth explains Grit as the power of passion and
perseverance for long term goals and achievements. She counts it as one
of the most important elements to succeed at anything individually.
Since, as a manager, you are in charge of so many others, having a high
level of Grit would always be a requisite.

Pursue your  [short and long term
goals](https://dzone.com/articles/setting-smart-goals-for-project-managers-an-introd) with
your team. Cultivate hope in case of setbacks\! Display courage and
resilience.

## Impart Recognition of Good Work

Every one of your employees has something that contributes positively to
your work.

A little encouragement from the manager can go a long way. So be
generous when appreciating someone’s work — be it little or big.

Impart recognition and support whenever possible to urge people on with
their great work and efforts.

## Grasp of the Entire Business

Your employees would definitely look up to you with some reverence and
admiration. You’d be their role model if you have a grasp on the entire
business-related activities. You can easily guide them and answer their
questions with expertise.

Of course, this has other benefits as well. With a better understanding
of the work you are doing for your company and employees, you’d be able
to take your company to new heights. Who doesn’t like working for a
thriving company, eh?

This would display your passion and high knowledge of the field for the
work you are doing, possibly inspiring your subordinates too.

## Empathy

### Empathy

The company or the team you are running is not constituted of machines
or work robots\! As simple as it sounds, it is quintessential to
remember that they are humans. Your team and company are, at the end of
the day, comprised of these people who have very “ *human”* day-to-day
problems.

As a manager, you are, in a general sense acting as their guardian. Be
as empathetic as you can while being an assertive manager. Understand
their problems and try to work with them. This in turn with earns your
employee loyalty and gratitude which would turn to better work for you
later on.

Show your team that you * really* care\!

### Humility and Leadership in Action Then

Recognizing humility in leadership can be challenging to do at times,
especially when looking in from the outside. Still, examples of humility
in leadership abound. Classic examples of humble leaders include Gandhi,
Abraham Lincoln, and Dr. Martin Luther King.

Now, what about among today’s modern business leaders? Because humble
leaders promote team success and performance, they are less likely to be
publicized as great leaders. Even so, look for great companies, and the
chances you’ll find humility and leadership exemplified by those in
authority increases substantially.

Humility is not necessarily the most important leadership trait taught
in school. Similarly, it is not exactly the most common leadership style
among organizations today. Nonetheless,  [humility and
leadership](https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbescoachescouncil/2017/09/14/the-importance-of-humility-in-leadership/#21ac00a52253) are
essential for businesses that want to advance in today’s world.

> ***Bold leaders who embrace humility pursue continuous growth and
> learning. They are authentic and seek the advice, input, and feedback
> from others. They consider others’ needs as priorities—creating an
> environment of respect, trust, and empowerment.***

As many companies have shown, humility and leadership are important
ingredients for business success. Truly, leaders who intentionally
demonstrate their strength through their humility will be the ones who
will most likely be the leaders of tomorrow.

### A Humble Leader in Action Now

Consider Chick-fil-A, for instance. Truett Cathy, founder, and owner of
the company is an excellent example of such a leader. He believed that
effective leaders place others’ needs above their own. Likewise, he saw
empowering others to grow and improve was essential. These commitments
along with a belief in a  [culture of respect and
dignity](https://www.boldbusiness.com/society/company-culture-vital-employee-success/) are
telltale signs of humility in leadership. Because of this, Chick-fil-A
grew to more than $5 billion in annual sales in 2013 and even eclipsed
KFC as the number one fast-food chicken restaurant in the country at one
point. All this occurred despite it being open for only six days a week
and having fewer stores than its competitors.

Cheryl Bachelder is another great example of  [a modern
leader](https://www.boldbusiness.com/human-achievement/fortune-500-female-ceos/) who
believes in humility. Bachelder took over as CEO of Popeyes in 2007
after the company had declined significantly. Immediately, she became
what she called a ‘servant leader’ and shifted the company’s attention
to looking at the needs of others. This decision not only pertained to
customers but to employees and franchisers as well. By being humble,
reaching out to others for feedback and being open to change, Bachelder
demonstrated evident humility and leadership. Within a few years,
Popeyes had increased their sales by 25 percent and their profits by 40
percent.

### Unafraid to Make Hard Decision

One of the toughest things that fall on the shoulders of a manager is
taking difficult decisions. This is the moment when a manager shows his
or her mettle\! Stiffen up that upper lip and get into it — with
wisdom\!

Your team would look up to you if you are able to keep your head
straight in face of adversary, and a plethora of factors to be counted
in for a decision. Sometimes the decision making is easy but executing
that decision is tougher for varying reasons. But you as a leader have
to do what is right and needed.

## Innovation

Inspire creativity in others through your own. Practice and learn how to
solve problems with innovative and intuitive ideas. This can make your
life easier and well, possibly for your team members too. Who doesn’t
like a little ease in life?

## Collaboration

It could be very easy to get wrapped up in your own mind and ideas. Make
sure to share your ideas and thoughts with your team openly and
honestly. You as a manager have to, of course, keep some decision to
yourself. However, it would be best if you take into consideration your
team’s work, experience, and expertise too.

[Working in
collaboration](https://dzone.com/articles/you-need-trust-for-collaboration-at-work) would
increase your experience not only as a manager but would add to your
people skills too.

## Sence of Humor

This one is a cherry on top sort of quality. Working for long hours can
get stressful. Having a manager who can add a fun little pun here or
there or make light of a taxing situation is a remarkable trait in
managers.

This will create a more approachable persona for the manager too among
the employees which are again always helpful in running a successful and
well-integrated team.

## Esprit de corps

Create “group spirit” in your team as you go\! You would have to utilize
a lot of the other traits on this list to get here. Keep a positive
outlook and manner towards your employees and watch it as you, your team
and your company have a fecund era.

### Share The Success

You go through a lot in a climbing expedition, but you are never alone.
You depend on your partner or team to get to the summit. You understand
that although you could  *maybe *get to the top by yourself, you’ll
enjoy it the most (both the achievement and the journey) if you get
there with a team. 

For me, a shared journey matters more than the final destination. If
it’s not shared and celebrated together, what's the point? It's like
reaching your best moment, looking around you, and finding out no one is
there to cheer with you. 

The same mantra can be applied to work. There's no "I" in team, that's
why success is something to be shared with everyone. Think about how
much you have accomplished because of your team and you will realize it
far surpasses what you would have accomplished alone. 

And don't forget to celebrate together.

At Trello, we often celebrate our moments during our  [team
offsites](https://blog.trello.com/how-to-plan-remote-team-offsite) since
we are a remotely distributed team. This gives the chance for us to
connect, bond and reflect on the great quarter or year we just had.

### Practice, Patience, Persistence, Gratitude

When you are in the wild, the problems of your daily life become
relative to the bigger picture and life’s luxuries turn out to be basic
things: a cup of tea, a beautiful starry sky, a consolation hug from a
friend. You actually start to appreciate all the little things in life
that you once took for granted (especially when you don’t have any
signal on your phone). 

You learn that patience and persistence are key to keep moving. 

Climbing a mountain is far from being an easy thing to do. Not only do
you encounter physical difficulties, but also mental challenges that
will drive you to the edge.

Although deep inside you are exhausted, you still find the energy to
continue one step at a time—even if it’s going to take several attempts
over many months, weeks, days or hours.

You know the reward will come. It’s like  [reaching a
goal](https://blog.trello.com/team-goal-setting-tips), achieving a dream
and figuring out that you can do anything that you set your mind to
accomplish. 

Have you stopped for a second to take the time to appreciate your work,
your co-workers, or employees? How often do you say thank you? 

Don't reserve your gratitude for special occasions, but make it standard
practice for you and your team to show to one another.

Since I joined Trello, I've been  [working
remotely](https://blog.trello.com/remote-work-team-success-guide). That
shift in my professional life was not easy. 

It took me months of patience and persistence to achieve a good balance.
Today, I see that remote work has empowered me to live the life I choose
to live, for which I am eternally grateful. It also reminds me that I am
responsible for making my own choices—no one else. Just like no one else
will reach the summit for me. 

Smart leaders know not to expect results overnight. Whether is a 
[dragging
project](https://blog.trello.com/8-ways-to-apply-a-new-perspective-to-a-dragging-project) or
a  [new marketing
campaign](https://blog.trello.com/trello-marketing-campaign-plan-ebook),
they have to work on their patience and persistence skills to keep going
and to motivate their team to do the same. 

When you start to encounter too many roadblocks, take a step back and
acknowledge how much you have done to be where you are, and then try
again the next day by looking at your challenges from a different angle.
Where there’s  [a
will](https://blog.trello.com/how-to-develop-unlimited-willpower),
there’s a way.

### Nurture Your Emotional Intelligence

During my all-female expedition, I learned that the cold, shortness of
breath, fatigue, fear, and failure are important to success. 

You can be in your best physical shape, but if your mind is not as
strong as your body, you can easily give up when you reach one or more
obstacles.

Why? Because climbing is 80% mental and 20% physical. The only way you
can work on your psychological health is by gaining experience with
struggle and building your  [self-awareness
muscle](https://blog.trello.com/self-validation-secret-to-limitless-motivation). 

The more you know yourself and can  [manage your
emotions](https://blog.trello.com/9-emotionally-intelligent-norms-team-needs-truly-productive),
the easier it is to overcome your fears and better control the outcomes.

The day of my ascent to Aconcagua summit, I struggled a lot with 
[negative self-talk](https://blog.trello.com/negative-self-talk) that I
was constantly repeating in my mind. That's when I learned I needed to
change the way I talk to myself on a regular basis.

It’s the same process at work. You can have all the hard skills to
succeed, but if you constantly suffer from  [impostor
syndrome](https://blog.trello.com/4-truths-of-impostor-syndrome) or an
“I am not \_\_\_\_\_ enough” attitude while executing your work, your
chances of reaching your goal will also decline. 

Learn about yourself. How do you react to other  [people's
feedback](https://blog.trello.com/process-feedback-at-work-stress)? Can
you control your temper, your 
[anxiety](https://blog.trello.com/hack-anxiety-at-work), or your fear of
failure? 

The mountain is a great environment to work on emotional intelligence
within because you can easily access how you feel about yourself. You
just need to listen to the voices in your head while walking. 

What do you tell yourself? What kind of words do you use? Are they
positive or negative?

### Be Open to Change

If you ever spend time in the mountains, you should know that the
weather changes in a heartbeat. 

No matter how much you plan, things can get out of control unexpectedly.
A member of your team gets injured, a strong wind hits you by surprise
taking your tent through the valley (yes, I've seen that happen\!), a
snowstorm comes earlier than predicted.  

You have to be flexible to change your plans and make good decisions
based on the facts and tools you have in the moment.

Like in the mountains, the business world is constantly changing, too.
What you are doing today, might not be the same thing as you will be
doing in a year’s time or even six months from now. Are you flexible
enough to accept constant change? 

Even though your job might not require you to climb mountains in extreme
weather or bivouac in the glacier, the professional leader needs agility
in times of change and uncertainty. Strength your ability to respond to
things quickly with good judgement. Rising to the occasion in the moment
is a trait of a successful leader and team.

### Build a Mountain Of Trust

Finally, a foundational quality for leaders is the ability to build
trust and confidence within a team, especially a team of climbers. 

You not only build trust in your partner but you also build trust in
yourself. It takes time and experience to trust your feet and your
capacity to climb.

Most importantly, you must trust your life to your partner's ability and
vice versa. You need to be familiar with each other's strengths as well
as one another's weaknesses.

That's why transparency and communication are so vital to building
trust. If I'm injured or sick, I must tell my team. If someone doesn't
master various rescue methods, the team must be aware of that gap and
resource accordingly based on the skills they have. 

Trust is also an essential investment for a safe and productive
workplace that everyone should develop as a leadership skill. If a
leader trusts their team to get the result they want, then there's no
need for  [micro-managing every
project](https://blog.trello.com/how-to-stop-micromanaging-your-remote-team).

Every leader needs to ask a very
important, look-in-the-mirror question: "Does my behavior increase
trust?" If you are considering elevating your leadership skills, trust
is a pillar your leadership should stand on. And trust cannot happen
without these building blocks:

  - Modeling transparency
  - Practicing accountability
  - Talking straight/being truthful
  - Admitting mistakes
  - Making things right

[Harvard Business
Review](https://hbr.org/2014/12/research-10-traits-of-innovative-leaders)
analyzed what goes into leadership excellence, and trust is a major
element. If your employees are going to feel safe coming up with
possibly risky experiments, they have to be confident that you'll be
receptive to their ideas. Productive teams know that mistakes are just
milestones on the road to the next great innovation.

  

### Developing Leadership Skills Outside Of Your Workspace


Many of the experiences and conditions we encounter in the mountains,
and in our life in general, apply to work life as well.

There are many leadership qualities that you can strengthen in the
mountains. Pick the one you think you need to improve the most and head
for the hills\! 

As Edmund Hillary once said:

> "It's not the mountain we conquer but ourselves." 

Every mountain can teach you something about yourself if you are willing
to see it from the top.

Coaching is a leadership competency required of today's leaders in the
most progressive companies. They dedicate time to provide personal
coaching and mentoring that are aligned with job purpose, performance
measures, and fulfilling the organizational mission. People, especially
Millennials, want to gravitate to leaders who will coach them to
success.

### Access the Damage

Are you having your employees work extra hours, come in on weekends
without so much as a thank you? Maybe you slipped up on social media. Or
you micromanage, never allowing your employees to take the reins they
should be empowered to have. Whatever it is, nail down your poor
leadership qualities — and be honest with yourself.

### Be Direct

This is the time to be humble. Admit your shortcomings to your staff,
and be clear and direct. Now is not the time to be defensive; lay it out
on the table. Your employees will appreciate you for it.

### Ask for Feedback

Step two will already open the doors of communication — leave them open.
Ask for feedback on what you could be doing better, how you can be
meeting your employees’ needs and expectations, and how you can empower
your workforce. Here's how TINYpulse client 
[Whitepages](http://www.whitepages.com/) used anonymous surveys as a way
to get regular feedback on leadership performance

### Have a Strategic Plan for Change

Take that feedback and make a plan for the future. This is where you are
not just a boss but a leader. And you need a plan to showcase strong
leadership qualities that reflect the needs of your workforce. According
to 
[Forbes](http://www.forbes.com/sites/glennllopis/2012/09/10/5-powerful-things-happen-when-a-leader-is-transparent/),
two crucial elements of this plan should be trust and
transparency. Employees want to work for a leader who is forthright and
open. And the trust should go both ways: employees should be able to
trust their leader, and they want that trust right back, empowering them
in the workplace. Implement specific goals and metrics for moving
forward in this direction.

### Follow Through

A plan is nothing without the follow-through. Execute. And you should
never be unsure of how your plan is working, because that open door of
communication should be delivering constant feedback.  

The importance of great leadership qualities in the workplace is too
high to leave bad bosses unchecked. Take time to recognize both the good
and bad in yourself so you can maximize your team’s potential.

### Learned vs. Innate Leadership Traits

Can these things actually be changed? In other words, are leaders born
or made? Are the characteristics of a good leader learned or
instinctive?

#### Here are the types of qualities that spring from a person’s natural capabilities

##### Empathy

This powerful quality allows leaders to connect with their employees on
a deeper level and understand how they’re feeling. It’s about putting
yourself in other people’s shoes and spending more time listening rather
than talking. When you have this level of understanding, you can make
better decisions for everyone.

##### Passion

We’ve all known a leader who is so in love with what they do and who
believes so deeply in an idea or cause. It’s contagious\! And passion
sure can’t be faked. Passion is what motivates employees to go the extra
mile, and most of the time, you’re either passionate about something or
you’re not. There’s not a lot of middle ground.

##### Humbleness

A humble leader is one who gives credit to others when deserved, who
calls on colleagues for help, and who realizes that the success of the
company depends on all employees, not just the big boss. Ego is not
something that develops overnight; the level of your ego is usually a
part of your innate personality.

#### In contrast, here are the qualities that leaders can work to develop

##### Communication skills

An effective communicator clearly explains tasks, deadlines, and
expectations while inspiring and motivating a workforce. Sure, some
people are naturally more articulate or communicative than others, but
being a skilled communicator takes time and practice.

##### Transparency

It may be easier to have tough conversations behind closed doors, but
employees want to know what is going on. The best leaders share where
the company is headed, what is going right or wrong, and what needs to
be improved.

##### Trustworthiness

If this were an innate quality, we would surely have more trust in the
world. Unfortunately, building trust is one of the hardest things to do,
and it takes a lot of time to foster personal relationships, act on
promises, and show that you are someone of your word.

A healthy balance of natural capabilities coupled with the desire to
learn seems to produce the best leaders.

### Promote Open Communication and Active Listening

People can’t do what they do best if you don’t communicate with them or
if they feel they can’t communicate with their managers. Make sure that
your workplace is an open and comfortable environment for conversation.
In your communication with your team, give your people the information
they need to succeed by being open, honest, and transparent about what
is happening within your organization. Share the strategy, the goals,
and the vision for where the company is heading to show your people that
they have an important role within the grand scheme of things.

Master the art of active and empathetic listening. When employees come
to management with their questions and concerns, it is crucial for
managers to hear them out and address what they have shared. In feeling
like they have a voice that is heard and respected, your people will
feel empowered.

A clear example of this practice is modeled by the culture at The
Container Store,  [ranked
No. 93](http://fortune.com/best-companies/the-container-store/) on 
*Fortune* 's annual list of "100 Best Companies to Work For." As part of
its  [foundation
principles](http://standfor.containerstore.com/category/foundation-principles)
, leaders there strive for every employee to know absolutely everything.
While this can be a daunting undertaking for any company, The Container
Store's leadership team firmly acknowledge the power behind this
principle with this  [key
statement](http://standfor.containerstore.com/our-foundation-principles/communication-is-leadership)
: "Nothing makes someone feel more a part of a team than knowing
everything has been communicated to them. We know that some information
we share could fall into competitors' hands, but the advantages far
outweigh the risks."

### Exchange Feedback Regularly

In addition to providing constructive feedback to their employees for
their continued success, effective people managers continually seek
feedback to improve their own performance. Tim Hird, executive director
of Robert Half Management Resources, recommends managers proactively
request input from employees by  [asking questions regarding their
communication
style](https://www.forbes.com/sites/lisaquast/2017/06/05/are-you-a-people-manager-here-are-the-2-skills-your-employees-say-you-need-to-improve/#607769cb6435),
such as “What type of information do you need and want from me?” and
“What am I doing well and where can I improve?”

When evaluating your people’s performance and giving feedback,
communicate to them what else they can do to improve their performance
in their role and offer to provide the support they need to get
there. Successful managers demonstrate consistency between their words
and their actions, as integrity strengthens their trust in their
management’s ability to lead. If you say something, mean it. If you
promise something, deliver.

### Provide Opportunites for Growth

Be a leader that commits to and champions a spirit of learning in your
work environment, sending a clear message that the growth of your people
is of utmost importance and priority to your organization.

For employees to do what they do best, they need to be constantly
challenged. They will benefit and thrive from new opportunities to
leverage and build upon their existing skills and to add additional
skills to their toolkit. As a leader, provide your people with new
learning and development opportunities. Allow for each employee to set
personal goals so they can achieve what they feel is valuable to their
career trajectory, and adapt those goals to specific roles and
responsibilities tied to your organization’s strategic priorities. When
managers support their people to get even better at what they do best,
they are helping them help your company.

### Create a Newwork of Support

In order for employees to feel empowered to do their best, they need to
feel that they have the support and encouragement of their leadership
and their team. Effective people managers are willing to try new ways of
thinking and experiment with new ways of doing things. Taking risks
builds confidence and sharpens one’s ability to be decisive. Build an
environment in which they feel safe and supported in risk-taking and
support your people, even when (and especially when) things do not go
according to plan.

Effective management also requires engaging other team members and
encouraging them to work together towards their shared goals. Sharing
information and inviting others to participate in collaboration
establishes trust and a common sense of purpose within a team.

### Reweard Good work with Recognition

Effective people managers know the value of telling employees when
they’ve done a good job, and they demonstrate this frequently. Giving
others credit when credit is due and acknowledging their people’s
contributions are two ways that successful managers create high
achieving teams. When managers let their people know their impact, they
ascribe meaning to the work they do. In promoting their accomplishments
within their team, they encourage momentum for further achievement.

In performance-driven workplaces, expressing gratitude is often
overlooked. Thanking employees for their hard work lets them know they
are appreciated and valued. Saying “thank you” takes a few seconds of
time and yet leaves a lasting impression.

### Be a Mentor

The best people managers are those who invest in their employees’ talent
and potential through mentorship and coaching. People want to gravitate
to leaders who will guide them to success. Leaders that dedicate time to
providing professional guidance can help their people remain connected
to their job purpose, performance measures, and fulfilling the
organizational mission. Successful managers provide their teams with the
encouragement, tools, and resources they need to not only do but excel
at their work.

### Thinking ahead to the Future

In an ever-changing workplace that is increasingly being impacted by
technology and global markets, positioning oneself for the future is
critical for the success of the company and the team. Effective people
managers position themselves for what lies ahead by staying on top of
their industry through reading periodicals, attending conferences, and
networking. From there, they seek opportunities to share what they learn
with their team members and incorporate new methods into their work
processes. 

### Agile Leaders Do

Agile Leaders focus on three things:

1.  they create and nurture a culture in which experimentation and
    learning are embraced
2.  they collaborate with employees (at all levels in the organization)
    to find common values to create a greater goal for the company and
    the teams
3.  they create an organizational structure that reinforces and rewards
    the other two dimensions

<kbd>![](https://scrumorg-website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/drupal/inline-images/2018-11/leadership%20focus.jpg)</kbd>

### Goals

Providing guiding vision for shared goal setting is, in my opinion, the
most important focus area, and the one that survives even after the
organization and culture are largely self-managing and self-sustaining.
The goals they inspire others to contribute to and make their own are
strategic, and are generally customer or market focused. By strategic, I
mean bold and audacious; both aspirational and inspirational. To
providing contrasting comparison, think about the motivational
difference between the goal of  [*landing on the moon and returning, by
the end of the decade*](https://er.jsc.nasa.gov/seh/ricetalk.htm)  with
a more prosaic goal of  *improving profitability by 25%*; no one is
going to tell their grandchildren that they helped improve investor
returns.

These motivational goals that leaders help us to identify have some
common characteristics: the are motivating and inspiring, but they also
are uncertain; they force us to stretch, to do things we have never done
before. That’s why agility is so important; if we knew how to reach
those goals, we should just develop a plan and march to it. Leaders help
their employees to persist in the pursuit of their shared goals and
values when times get rough and old behaviors want to take over.

### Organization

The basic agile team structure is very simple; if we use Scrum as an
example, there are only three roles: the Product Owner, the Development
Team, and the Scrum Master. But not everything an organization does is
done by an agile team; agility is needed whenever we are dealing with
complexity, but not everything is complex. If you were running a company
that makes paint, research and development would need agility, but the
paint factory itself might be better suited to using lean processes;
unless you’re doing a lot of small-batch custom manufacturing, a
predictive continuous flow process is probably better than planning
production as a series of Sprints. 

The point is that, unless you are a small software start-up, there will
always be things outside the scope of what agile teams do, even if they
are only as mundane as payroll, accounting, tax compliance, legal, and
investor relations. The role of management is to design, monitor, and
correct this system to make sure that the organization achieves its
goals. Even product development companies need to do more than simply
developing the product.

Where agile leadership comes into play in the management context is that
they need to make sure that the different parts of the organization,
with different operating models, don’t destroy each other. Put more
positively, agile leaders need to help the organization optimize for
flexibility and continuous improvement, making sure that improving
customer outcomes always comes first, and that the other parts of the
organization support this mission. But the other things need to get
done, too.

Agile leaders also help teams progress in their maturity. Agility is not
binary, and there are predictable stages that teams go through as they
improve their ability to learn and improve. Leaders create a supportive
environment in which teams can progress, they provide coaches and
exposure to peers who can help the teams learn, and they commit
themselves to improving their own abilities in parallel.  [My college
Ron Eringa has written a handful of excellent blog posts about this
topic.](http://roneringa.com/leading-scrum-teams-to-maturity/)

### Culture

The most important thing agile leaders do is to foster a culture that
supports empiricism and learning, and that is constantly seeking better
customer outcomes and better ways of achieving those outcomes. The
challenge for leaders is that they can’t dictate the culture; they can
only create the right conditions for it to emerge. Some of my colleagues
like to use a “gardener” metaphor: if you’ve ever had a garden, you know
that you can’t  *make* anything grow. You can create the right
conditions with the right amount of water (but not too much), and enough
sun (but not too much). You can remove other plants that might compete
with the ones you want to grow, and you can protect the plants from
predation. 

You can’t control all factors, however, and an organization’s culture
emerges only partly as an expressions of its leaders aspirations; most
of it comes from the people in the organization, how they treat each
other and work together. Culture is the non-copyable  *je ne sais
quoi *that makes your organization unique. But while leaders can’t
control and dictate this culture, they can encourage it and cause it to
flourish by the examples they set and the behaviors that they model.

### Servers the needs of Others

The common leadership behaviors written about in some of the 
[bestselling
books](https://www.inc.com/marcel-schwantes/15-best-servant-leadership-books-of-all-time-to-read-before-you-die.md) originate from
what is arguably the most successful leadership philosophy in the
universe:  [Servant
Leadership](http://www.inc.com/marcel-schwantes/10-convincing-reasons-to-consider-servant-leadership-according-to-research.md).

If you're new to the idea, servant leaders are people-centric, not
egocentric. Their winning formula is to serve by shining the spotlight
on others.

*[The Washington
Post](https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/capitalbusiness/servant-leadership-a-path-to-high-performance/2013/04/26/435e58b2-a7b8-11e2-8302-3c7e0ea97057_story.md)*
 says servant leaders have "high emotional engagement, loyalty, and
productivity, and outperform the competition daily."

This is not soft-skills, pushover nonsense; servant leaders command a
much higher level of trust from their tribe, and over time are much more
successful.

Today, scores of successful companies embrace the practice of servant
leadership, including some that have made  *Fortune* magazine's list of
the  [100 Best Companies to Work
For](http://fortune.com/best-companies/) over the years, like
TDIndustries, who is led by a true servant leader CEO-- [Harold
MacDowell.](http://www.leadershipfromthecore.com/harold-macdowell/)

### Good Leaders "remove the mask"

Leadership seems to come naturally to some, though it may come at a
price. You first need to  *grow up*. So declares
venture-capitalist-turned-leadership-coach Jerry Colonna, the "CEO
Whisperer"  [I recently interviewed on my
podcast](http://www.leadershipfromthecore.com/jerry-colonna/) who's
known to make founders and CEOs cry by asking tough personal questions. 

In his new book,  *[Reboot: Leadership and the Art of Growing
Up](https://www.reboot.io/book/)* , Colonna explains the value--and
challenges--of self-inquiry, and says a key step to more effective
leadership is to remove the masks.

He says, "We are master self-deceivers. Most of us start lying to
ourselves when we begin lying to others. We wear masks that we want
other people to see and attempt to hide away the real parts of
ourselves. Self-deception is a form of survival that serves no
beneficial purpose. If you want to lead, you have to remove the mask."

### Good Leaders set their people up for success

"What do you need from me?"  That is the most important question a
leader can ask, and an essential one to engage employees. 

Calvin G. Butler, Jr., CEO of  [Baltimore Gas and
Electric](https://www.bge.com/AboutUs/Pages/default.aspx), is a model
example of this philosophy. He says, "As a leader, I set the strategy,
select the best talent, and then empower them to do their jobs--and to
do them well."

Butler focuses on three critical things along the way: 1) his
people's development, 2) their accountability to achieve success, 3)
and eliminating roadblocks that interfere with their and the company's
success.

### Why Being a Tough Boss Doesn't Make You a Good Boss (and How to Change)

There's no evidence to show that being really tough on workers helps the
bottom line long term. Try these strategies for softening your approach.

A  [2017 review of scientific
studies](https://www.annualreviews.org/doi/abs/10.1146/annurev-orgpsych-041015-062539) on
supervisor behavior that bordered on abusive, found no evidence to
support the idea that a tough boss is more likely to get results.

Not only is it a myth that tough bosses get better results, but tough
bosses may be bad bosses. The behaviors that make a business leader
"tough" can veer quickly into harmful choices. This can alienate peers
and chase off top talent.

Even if you aren't a toxic boss, however, too much toughness can be
self-defeating when it comes to employee morale at your company. 

Fortunately, you can change your leadership style and gain the benefits
of a softer, more balanced approach to managing employees and growing
your business. 

### Recognize the strength in being tough without over-relying on it.

I try to remember that "tough" is a subjective standard, but it's one
that's based on certain common strengths. By understanding what those
strengths are, and cultivating (without over-relying on) them,
entrepreneurs can temper the edge that is often seen as tough or even
abusive. 

Some of best leaders I've met have these qualities. Most workers
appreciate the type of boss who makes  [quick
decisions](https://www.inc.com/john-boitnott/5-tips-to-make-business-decisions-if-you-re-an-indecisive-leader.md) with
a healthy dose of confidence. Whether the decision turns out to be boon
or bust, these good managers shrug and move on quickly. 

Many "tough" business owners tend to take greater risks. However, these
risks must be calculated ones. Rashly choosing a risky course of conduct
without first doing due diligence or considering pros and cons isn't
good leadership. It's just reckless behavior from a difficult boss. 

### Cultivate your softer side

Much of what employees view as "toughness" comes down to the respect, or
lack thereof, they sense being extended to them. Therefore, one of the
best ways to soften up is to focus on cultivating empathy and
compassion.

Try to express genuine interest in your colleagues and employees, both
in their personal well-being and in their workplace experiences. People
respond more warmly to those who express warm interest in them. So if
you're struggling to break out of "tough boss" mode, find some common
ground and listen actively. 

### Improve your communications.

Workers often find bosses "tough" simply because they show their
frustration and annoyance when they're not satisfied with particular
results. To avoid this, first get very clear with yourself about your
expectations. Then you can communicate them more effectively to others.
During performance reviews for example, use constructive criticism if an
employee doesn't meet high expectations.

Always avoid 
[micromanaging](https://www.inc.com/john-boitnott/4-strategies-i-use-if-i-catch-myself-micromanaging-employees-or-myself-too-much.md),
however. Tell them what you expect to see when the task is complete, but
shy away from dictating how that task gets done. Let your employees
exercise independence in ways appropriate to their position and skill
level. 

### Ask for input.

Tough bosses often don't value input from others. Yet if you've added
them to your team, you should absolutely want to hear what they have to
say. Look for opportunities to seek input from executives, managers and
employees in the form of direct reports. 

Great leaders with higher emotional intelligence don't simply take input
like a human suggestion box, though. Show true respect for workers as
co-creators and teammates by valuing their hard work and new ideas. Look
actively for ways to act on that input when possible. 

### Think about others.

How would you feel if someone looked for ways to improve your day or
make your job easier? Most of us would feel more open to that person or
even consider them a friend. 

You can cultivate that goodwill in your employees by taking the same
approach. Consider what can make your workers' lives easier. This
doesn't need to be something huge, like a large company-wide bonus
(although that would be nice). Look for actions you can take or changes
you can make that result in a positive change for staff. 

I  know one founder who provided a high-quality coffee service instead
of simply putting an office coffee maker in the break room. Another
entrepreneur hired massage therapy students to offer short back and neck
rubs during stressful projects at his company. Even small acts of
thoughtfulness help soften up your image and increase positive feelings
in your employees.

### Lead by Example

In the world of sports, the best coaches were star players first. In
order to bring out the best in your team, your behaviour needs to match
your expectations. By modelling the attitude, work ethic and standards
you expect from the team you inspire them to reach their own potential.
Furthermore, being an expert in your field and understanding what is
required to be a top performer before taking on a leadership role means
you are in a position to impart valuable knowledge and skills gained
over time to others because ultimately the best bosses are good
teachers.

### Identify and evaluate strengths and weaknesses

Evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of each individual team member.
Once you’ve identified their strengths, you need to give your employees
the opportunities to use them. Work with them to map out their career
paths, and provide the coaching and mentoring needed to become their
best selves. People genuinely want to succeed, and it’s your job as a
leader to equip them with what they need in order to develop and
accomplish their objectives.  Josh Bersin notes in his article,  *HR
Technology in 2018* “Continuous performance management is possible, it
works, and it can transform your company. We’re not talking about doing
away with ratings, rather we are talking about building a new, ongoing
process for goal setting, coaching, evaluation, and feedback.” Appeal to
your team’s strengths and give them responsibility, as they earn small
wins, their confidence grows.

### Create a psychologically safe environment

The human brain is hardwired to detect threats to physical or emotional
safety. Negative criticism generally shuts down the parts of the brain
responsible for creativity and problem solving, which is why giving
people permission to think, speak, and act with reason generates an
environment conducive for high-level work and breeds loyalty. Taking
time to remain connected with one’s team means you have insight into
their needs and are in a position to detect problems as and when they
come up.

### Give recognition where it’s due

Fair, clear, and consistent praise is about making employees feel good
about themselves – this gives them confidence in their contribution to
the company when they feel challenged as well as when things are going
well. Giving recognition when it’s due and taking time to let your
employees know the positive impact their work has on the business makes
them feel valued for their output. Valued employees also trust the
organisation they work for and are more likely to remain loyal.

The importance of equipping leaders in your organisation with the
necessary skills to bring out the best in others cannot be downplayed.
With one boss overseeing at times large teams, the impact of a bad
manager is far-reaching with great effect on worker productivity.  It is
therefore vital to employ supervisors with serious consideration.

### Focus on Employee Strengths

A strengths-based workplace culture offers measurable advantages:
Gallup's [2015 Strengths
Meta-Analysis](http://www.gallup.com/services/193427/2016-strengths-meta-analysis.aspx?utm_source=gbj&utm_campaign=20170103-gbj&utm_medium=copy) presents
the "powerful connections between employee strengths development and
business performance." Their report shows that a strengths-based
workplace increases employee retention by up to 72 percent in
high-turnover industries, increases profits by 14 to 29 percent and
decreases safety incidents by up to 59 percent.

References

  - [Trello - 5 Leadership Skills You Can Develop In The
    Mountains](https://blog.trello.com/leadership-skills-you-can-develop)
  - [Tiny Pulse - top leadership
    qualities](https://www.tinypulse.com/blog/sk-top-leadership-qualities)
  - [Scrum.org - what do agile leaders
    do](https://www.scrum.org/resources/blog/what-do-agile-leaders-do)
  - [Rise People - habits of highly effective people
    managers](https://risepeople.com/blog/habits-of-highly-effective-people-managers/)
  - [Inc - 4 harsh truths you must accept to become a better
    leader](https://www.inc.com/marcel-schwantes/4-harsh-truths-you-must-accept-to-become-a-better-leader.md)
  - [Inc - why being a tough boss doesnt make you a good boss and how to
    change](https://www.inc.com/john-boitnott/why-being-a-tough-boss-doesnt-make-you-a-good-boss-and-how-to-change.md)
  - [Factor10consulting - how great leaders bring out the best in
    others](https://factor10consulting.co.za/how-great-leaders-bring-out-the-best-in-others/)
  - [Medium thangh9 - how humble leadership really
    works](https://medium.com/@thangh9/how-humble-leadership-really-works-ac86ec95f912)
  - [Achievers - 12 traits make great
    manager](https://www.achievers.com/blog/12-traits-make-great-manager/)
  - [Bold Business - humility leadership
    combination](https://www.boldbusiness.com/human-achievement/humility-leadership-combination/)


