###### [Home](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/blob/master/README.md) | [Leadership](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/tree/master/Leadership/README.md) |
------------

# Leadership : Leadership Professional Development

## Training for Every Learner

Let’s focus on four common types of learners: auditory, visual,
writers/readers, and kinesthetic. Auditory learners learn best by
hearing, visual learners do best by seeing, writers and readers do best
by reading, and kinesthetic learners learn best by doing. While people
may lean towards one way of learning over another, most people will
learn best through a combination of these.  
As I learned through my own experience, someone talking to me and
walking me through a hypothetical scenario did help me to learn, but
still left me with terrible gaps and no resources to turn to. Even if
you have stacks of training documents for employees to search through,
that doesn’t mean everything will start making sense to them.

  - **Written documents detailing a process.** These can be short or
    long depending on the subject matter. It should be properly
    formatted so it’s not only easy to read and digest, but employees
    can also easily search through the document to find the specific
    part they’re having trouble with.
  - **Screenshots or video of said processes.** These are supplementary
    for your visual learners. These back up the written details in the
    document. These are particularly helpful for remote workers. While
    you may not have many remote employees yet, the remote-working trend
    has grown by  [103%
    since 2005](https://www.highspeedinternet.com/resources/history-remote-workers/),
    so it’s smart to have trainings that can be helpful for those in the
    office and those at home.
  - **A dedicated person who can answer questions during the training
    period.** Too often companies say, “Ask someone on the team if you
    have a question.” This is a terrible waste of time for multiple
    people. What one person is an expert in, another person may only
    have a basic knowledge of themselves. Have a few trusted employees
    who are happy to mentor and also have time to mentor for specific
    tasks, otherwise, you’ll have one employee interrupting others
    workflow.
  - **A time to follow up on training.** Set up a time within the next
    few weeks after the initial training to follow up with your employee
    to see what they retained and what they have questions on. Now that
    they’ve had time to try things out on their own, they’ll be better
    prepared to ask more meaningful questions or clear any remaining
    confusion.

## Make a Smart Investment

When interviewing candidates, imagine them being a part of your
organization years down the road. Don’t just think of them for what you
are hiring them for, think of them as a leader and view them as such. Do
they have that potential?

Sure. You can’t predict the future. But, what’s the point in investing
in an employee if you’ve trained them up for a competitor? Or, what if
they have the talent — but aren’t a good fit for your company culture?
You’re going to not only have to let them go, but you’ll also have to go
through the hiring process all again.

When hiring potential employees, make sure that they possess the skills
that you need both now and in the future. The new employee needs to gel
with your company’s culture and be excited about your products and
services. You should check their references to see if they are
trustworthy and have integrity.

When you find the ideal candidate — do all that you can to retain them.
Paying them a competitive salary and offering perks that they care about
are prominent places to start.

## Know who they are

Another way to hold on to your top talent and potential leaders is to
get to know them better. Discover their strengths and weaknesses. Find
out what motivates and interests them inside and outside of work. Stay
connected with them and ask how they’re doing.

Knowing your team on a deeper level creates a more positive work
environment. It also shows that you genuinely care about your employees.
You can also use this knowledge to begin shaping and inspiring them to
become a leader. For example, if they lack communication skills — then
you could show them the basics of nonverbal communication and recommend
that they take a public-speaking class.

Not sure how to do this? Well, you could have informal chats with your
team during breaks. Invite them to lunch or schedule a one-on-one
walking meeting. Ask for their feedback through surveys. And, you could
also have monthly  [team-building
activities ](https://www.calendar.com/blog/team-building-activities/)where
you get to understand who they indeed are. You may even get to see their
hidden talents in-action.

## Help them Drop bad Habits

“Habits play an important role in our health,” 
[says](https://newsinhealth.nih.gov/2012/01/breaking-bad-habits) Dr.
Nora Volkow, director of NIH’s National Institute on Drug Abuse.
“Understanding the biology of how we develop routines that may be
harmful to us, and how to break those routines and embrace new ones,
could help us change our lifestyles and adopt healthier behaviors.”

At work, you could steer them towards more healthy routines. For
example, you could suggest that they implement a morning routine where
they exercise and eat a healthy breakfast, instead of sleeping in and
grabbing a doughnut. Another idea would be letting them know the
importance of work-life balance by not sending them emails when they’re
not working.

Additionally, you could show your employees how to change their routines
to be more productive. For instance, as opposed to checking your phone
every time you receive a notification, block out specific times for this
action. Encourage them to work on their most important tasks when they
have the most energy.

And, you could also help them break those bad habits that are holding
them back from work. Examples would include never taking breaks, always
being late, making excuses, and preferring only to work alone. You
wouldn’t want to see these habits in an employee, let alone a leader who
is supposed to be setting an example.

## Teach and Encourage them to network

“Networking is not only fun but essential to individual growth and
business development,” writes Andre Lavoie in a previous 
[*Entrepreneur*](https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/242663)  article.
“Start small by encouraging networking within the workplace during
lunch hours or at after-work events.” When they feel more comfortable,
have them go outside of your organization by attending industry events.

“Networking will teach them how to forge powerful connections, initiate
conversations with strangers, and act with the confidence of a leader.”
The power of networking can open the door to new business opportunities
and gives your team the chance to exchange ideas. And, “networking can
help turn good employees into great leaders by raising their reputation
within the industry,” adds Lavoie.

## Provide Plenty of Opportunites for them to learn

The only way that your employees are going to develop both the hard and
soft skills to become a leader is through proper training. You can’t go
wrong with tried and true techniques like formal education and training.
You could also pay for them to attend workshops and industry events.
Another idea would be to suggest consuming content like books, blogs,
podcasts, or videos that could help them improve upon their weaknesses.

Personally, I learn best by doing. So, delegate some of your
responsibilities to them. You could also let them take over an upcoming
meeting. You’ll want to be there to guide your employees as they
navigate new skills — but allow them to fail a bit. After all, failure
is often the best teacher.

## Find time to Mentor

As a leader,  [being a
mentor](https://www.calendar.com/blog/how-to-find-the-time-for-mentoring/) within
your organization is a must. Besides being beneficial and rewarding on
your end — it’s one of the best ways to boost the careers of your
employees. Mainly mentoring provides opportunities for you to pass on
your knowledge bass to potential leaders.

As a mentor — you’ll help mentees set and achieve short-and-long-term
goals. You’ll also be there to help them work through any difficulties.
And, because you’re their biggest fan, cheerleader, and advocate — you
can motivate and reassure them when they stumble.

If you don’t believe that you have the availability or know-how to be a
mentor — that’s not a problem. Refer this individual to someone who you
think can guide them — don’t just toss them out.

## Encourage Decisiveness and Accountability

If you are continually micromanaging and criticizing your
leader-in-training, they will fall.

“One important trait of being a leader is the ability to make decisions
and to be accountable for your actions,” writes  [Lolly
Daskal](https://www.lollydaskal.com/leadership/how-to-encourage-your-employees-to-take-leadership-roles/).
“When you give your employees autonomy and authority, you’re telling
them you trust them.” As a result, they’ll “step up and surprise you
with how much they can do if they know you are counting on them.”

## Help Naviage Organization Politics and Culture

“Although ‘politics’ is often viewed as a dirty word, it’s the way
things get done in organizations,” writes Dan McCarthy for  [Balance
Careers](https://www.thebalancecareers.com/developing-your-employees-2275869).
“Your staff needs to know this and learn to navigate the office
culture.”

How can you achieve this? McCarthy suggests job shadowing and
role-playing as “ways to educate employees about the ins and outs of
being politically savvy.”

I’d also add that you must get everyone on the same page regarding
company policies and standards. And make sure to cultivate a positive
work environment where respect and transparency are the norms.

## Keep them well

When your employees aren’t at 100%, either physically or mentally, their
productivity and overall well-being suffer. So, if they’re sick, tired,
and burned out in their current position — you can’t expect them to
thrive in their work now nor the future leadership role. It takes a long
time to rehire — consider keeping your employees well, both mentally and
physically.

[You can encourage your employees to prioritize their
health](https://www.calendar.com/blog/encourage-employees-to-prioritize-health-and-wellness/) by
launching an employee wellness program. You could also promote
preventive care, provide healthy snacks, and encourage them to be more
physically active. Other options would be to show them how to manage
their stress correctly and where to seek help when needed.

Most importantly, I would suggest that you be open about your own health
struggles, especially when it comes to mental health since this will
remove any stigmas. There has been a lot of 
[research](https://hbr.org/2019/10/research-people-want-their-employers-to-talk-about-mental-health) showing
that people want their employers to discuss mental health, especially if
you have Millennial and Gen Z employees.

## Teach them Practical Time Management Skills

If your employees are struggling with time management now — then how
will they fare once in a leadership position? From my experience, not
very well. You can help your team solve their time management problems
by setting clear expectations and timelines.

Train your employees well in time management right in the beginning and
recommend they conduct a time audits continually. Suggest that they
protect their  [maker
time](https://theagiledirector.com/article/2014/02/21/maker-time-vs-manager-time/).
I’d also share with them a variety of time management techniques that
have worked for you. Examples would be prioritizing goals, eating the
frog, the 80/20 rule, block scheduling, and saying “no.”

## Keep it Painless

As soon as you mention training in a room you can often see eyes glaze
over or glance towards their cell phone, fingers twitching. While
training may not ever be something to be excited about, engagement can
definitely be improved upon. Here’s how to keep it painless and
cost-effective.

  - **Section it out into tasks but keep them short**. If it takes an
    hour to go over before the person even has a chance to try out any
    of the concepts, your training is too long.
  - **Keep it flexible, rigidity is the enemy to learning**. Have the
    essential learnings and how you plan to teach them but include time
    for questions and adaptation if things don’t go how you think they
    will. Geraldine Joaquim of Mind Your Business sums this up best, “A
    good trainer will ‘read’ the audience and know if they need to
    tailor their talk, perhaps emphasizing certain aspects that will
    garner more engagement in the subject. This doesn’t mean they miss
    parts of the core content, but there is no point laboring on an area
    that is causing yawns\!”
  - **Engage, engage, engage**. Out of 1,000 office workers, 33% said
    they wanted hands-on experience with what they were being trained
    on. Your employees will be more likely to retain their knowledge if
    they are actively doing the work as it’s being taught to them.
    Include time to let them try out concepts, ask them questions, make
    sure they are on the right path.
  - **Take breaks and be social**. All work and no play makes anyone a
    dull person, so don’t be afraid to share stories, ask the employees
    about them, and ask some questions after every section or before
    starting the next section. Even though training can be boring, that
    doesn’t mean you have to be too.

## Engage Employees with Training

### Make it personal

Typically, making something personal isn’t the best idea – especially in
the workplace. However, when it comes to employee training, the more
personalized you make training, the more likely your employee will
respond positively to training. The best way to do this is to keep the
learner at the center of the training. Pushing learning, especially
learning curriculums that are of a one-size-fits-all variety, is a quick
way to turn your employees off, and even results in an adverse effect on
their work, with time lost and possible feelings of devaluation.

### Ask your employees

Sometimes asking your 
[employees ](https://www.lifehack.org/397862/10-ways-to-help-your-employees-have-a-healthy-work-life-balance)can
lead to a dead end, due to the circumstances, office politics, and so
forth. Sometimes you need to intervene and make a decision that’s best
for the company. Training can be like that too. Sometimes you might have
an employee who is good at recognizing their strengths and weaknesses,
and other times you’ll have to step in and offer some guidance.
Regardless of the type of employee, when it comes to training and
self-improvement, it’s always a good idea to ask them first. After all,
it’s important for employees to be engaged. For example, in various
coding classes, there are many ways to help employees retain their
training knowledge, while also being a win-win for the company. This
doesn’t need to be a daunting thing at all. A simple conversation about
personal development goals is likely a conversation that will leave you
both feeling better and it’ll offer clearer insights into how your
employee views their development while also giving you some key insights
into what motivates them and what they see as important.

### Career advancement

If your employee sees a clear path in their professional development
through training, they’re much more likely to be invested in their
training. This can be the outcome of higher wage or even a better
position within the company. In some ways, this is dangling the carrot.
You offer a potential reward, and they’ll do the work to try and achieve
what they need to achieve in order to get that reward. Beware of making
promises you cannot keep, as there’s nothing more demotivating than a
broken promise.

### Multiple formats

The advances in eLearning have been dramatic over the last few years.
With sources such as [Lynda.com](http://Lynda.com) and more, there has
never been a better time to offer eLearning for your employees, which
provides further training without breaking the bank. Combine this with a
BYOD (bring your own device) or a working from home option, and you’ve
got a compelling mix of learning and flexibility that will appeal to
many people. This doesn’t mean that you shouldn’t offer in-house,
in-person training too. There is still a lot of value to be gained from
learning from each other one-on-one or in a small classroom environment.

### Bake training into the culture

An excellent way to get your employees to respond to training is to make
it a part of your company culture. This doesn’t mean superficially
offering training or forcing unwanted or unnecessary training onto your
employees; it means encouraging people to learn from each other, to make
learning a priority and not a secondary act. Have a centralized
knowledge base, one that is actively maintained and contributed to.
Encourage discussion. Make problem-solving and helping a virtue in your
company, not a taboo. Encourage questions, allow people’s curiosity to
flow, and ask people to punch holes in ideas. This takes everyone to
buy-in if it is to succeed. It’s not a one-off trick and it’s got to
start at the very top.

### Recognize experts when you have them

Sometimes you’ll be fortunate enough to have an expert on your team. No
matter what they’re an expert in, an expert is always a great asset for
a company – when their expertise are used correctly. There are many ways
to utilize expert knowledge within your company, but simply recognizing
when someone is excellent at something and having that information be
known to the rest of your company, is a great way to start. They could
hold a small discussion or a classroom style meeting. They could present
some of their knowledge to the people who are most interested and in
need of their expertise – the list goes on. Regardless of how your
company uses this expert, merely recognizing this person will provide a
boost in morale to everyone.

### Rewards

The final idea on the list appeals to our most basic human selves: a
reward for doing something good. Everyone enjoys a pat on the back now
and then and a pat on the back with a gift card or dinner at a nice
restaurant or a trip to a sporting event are all simple ways to reward
someone for their hard work. These are best presented at milestones, big
or small, and are an excellent way to affirm your employee for the job
they’re doing positively.

## Coaching

### Hold them accountable

Let your managers know that you expect them to coach every direct report
on a regular and consistent basis. To me, the biggest asset you have is
the undeveloped potential of your team members. The leader coach needs
to develop that potential to the fullest extent. Hold them accountable
by asking for a monthly coaching report, and make that activity part of
their annual performance review.

### Train them

I find that, unfortunately, most leaders are not organically good at
coaching, because talking about tough topics can lead to conflict with
the person they're coaching. Even qualified leaders often don't know how
to handle it, because they haven't received coaching in their own career
and seen it modeled. Training is essential for developing the competence
and confidence to be an effective coach.

## Change their mindset

When I was a vice president in corporate America and asked people to
meet with me, they always thought they were in trouble. Why? Because the
only conversation they had with leaders in the past was disciplinary. I
believe there are two different kinds of coaching: corrective and
developmental. An example of corrective coaching is a discussion to
modify an unproductive behavior, like being late to work too often.
Developmental coaching is talking about someone's career goals and how
to develop the skills, knowledge or expertise to help them get there.
The reality is the leaders need to be having more developmental coaching
conversations. That change of mindset can increase sales, increase
productivity and boost morale.

### Reward and incentivize

The reality is humans do what they are rewarded for doing. Put
together a leader's compensation package or provide a bonus for their
role as a coach. Far too often, we reward managers for meeting business
objectives, but don't set or reward coaching objectives. Create a "coach
of the year" award for one manager each year, and generally compliment
leaders for coaching and developing team members. 

The bottom line is, if you want success and growth, you have to coach
the coaches. 

References

  - [Business Insider - even bosses need coaching this is how to coach
    coaches](https://www.businessinsider.com/even-bosses-need-coaching-this-is-how-to-coach-coaches-2019-9#4-reward-and-incentivize-4)
  - [Medium - The five conditions for
    improvement](https://medium.com/@royrapoport/the-five-conditions-for-improvement-20909f856dab)
  - [Glassdoor - Train
    employees](https://www.glassdoor.com/employers/blog/train-employees/)
  - [Lifehack - 7 ways to engage employees with
    training](https://www.lifehack.org/500934/7-ways-to-engage-employees-with-training)
  - [Linkedin - 10 strategies turning your employees leaders john
    rampton](https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/10-strategies-turning-your-employees-leaders-john-rampton)



