###### [Home](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/blob/master/README.md) | [Leadership](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/tree/master/Leadership/README.md) |
------------

# Leadership : Lead Remote Teams

## How to Effectively Lead Remote IT Teams

  - In order to build trust and bond with someone you really need to go
    and arrange a meeting – it is our ape-brain that always says that a
    new person that you've never met is most probably a threat to your
    well being.
  - Make sure you do a thorough interview before bringing someone new in
    the team. You can use different tools like hacker rank to check
    their IT skills.
  - With good on boarding, you can get twice the employee engagement in
    just one hour. It turns out it is far better to ask the newcomer
    about them and let them talk.
  - The last thing you want is people who feel restricted to ask
    questions, propose new ideas or experiment with better solutions.
  - The best measure of team collaboration is how many times team
    members interact. If you are not at the same office, make sure you
    design special meetings for interactions.

If you are about to build a software product or implement a digital
platform, then there are many things you need to consider – like product
design, technology stack, architecture and so on. And many times we
forget, that at the end the most crucial part is the team that will
deliver it.

Many people think that selecting proven experts and giving them а pile
of cash is enough to reach success.  However, history has proven that’s
not the case – there are many multi-million dollar companies that have
big cash cushion and can afford all the talent and yet they've lost the
race to a small competitor. Take the example of Overture – a company
with 1b valuation that got out competed by Google's Ads, which was a
startup at that time. Or the example of one Swedish broadcasting group
that did not spare money to hire the most brilliant names in media but
finally failed to create a streaming service that could compete with
Netflix.

In his book  [The Culture
Code](https://www.amazon.com/Culture-Code-Secrets-Highly-Successful/dp/0525492461)
, Daniel Coyle makes a deep dive into what makes some teams extremely
efficient and why others fail miserably. And much of his researches
shows that the most critical part in delivering successful product is
the team, team dynamics and team culture.

For the past 13 years running my custom software development 
[company](https://dreamix.eu/) , I’ve been involved in forming many
product development teams. Most of them have been distributed and in
this article I outline what are the risks and how to solve them when
working with distributed teams.

## It all Starts with Creating a Real Bond

You always need to build trust first and to bond with someone new you
really need to go and do a live meeting – it is our ape-brain that
always says that a new person that you've never met is most probably a
threat to your well being. That is until you meet, have a fireside chat,
tell each other’s story and drink a couple of beers. Then we have the
opportunity to find all the similar experiences and preferences we share
and also discuss our weaknesses, which in fact creates an even stronger
bond.

This is also the reason why we start each of our new partnerships with
either a visit to our partner's office or we welcome them yo ours.
Because forming this initial bond is what drives us through the
challenges of the projects that are yet to come.

### Encourage Transparency

As a manager/leader, you also need to lead by example. You can’t expect
your remote workers to open up, get to know you and each other or
discuss projects and share their opinion, if you don’t do that yourself.

Be transparent. Get them involved in all aspects of the business, share
with them the company vision and objectives, let them resonate with
that. Then, set clear expectations, tell them some things about yourself
and let them talk about something other than work too.

That’s when virtual meetings come in handy.

### Hold Regular Meetings

This is one of the challenges of working with a remote team as
everyone’s in a different time zone. But you can do it.

The only way to understand what kind of people you have on the team is
to meet at least once a week and just create a friendly and honest
environment where everyone can talk about anything. Consider it virtual
coffee and even call it that way.

There are many benefits to virtual meetings. It doesn’t matter if the
remote workers are traveling, at home, at a co-working space or in a
office. The point is to sign in the software you’re using for such
meetings and relax for the next half an hour or so.

Over time, you’ll connect with each other and will feel more like a
team.

### Organize Your Work

A proper structure is what boosts any business. Managing people across
the globe without knowing what everyone’s working on and having many
projects on your hands can easily turn work into chaos. That’s why you
need to create procedures and implement  [project management
systems](https://www.actitime.com/productivity-tools/project-management-tools?source=post_page---------------------------)
, set rules and share them with everyone on the team.

For a start, organize all the data, categorize it, and make it available
to all team members. Decide on the communication style for each
situation. For example, you can email each other for things that can
wait, but can also use a chat room that’s open 24/7 if something urgent
comes up.

Set clear deadlines and make sure everyone knows the next steps on the
project. Make use of the collaboration and sharing options that 
[project management tools
offer](https://www.actitime.com/features-in-detail/project-and-task-management?source=post_page---------------------------)
 so you can see what others are working on and what’s left to be done.

### Use a Time Tracking Tool

Another thing you need in your arsenal is a  [time-tracking
tool](https://www.actitime.com/time-tracking/what-is-time-tracking?source=post_page---------------------------)
. This is an efficient way to keep your employees on track, review their
performance, set clear objectives, and increase team productivity.

Be sure to introduce the new piece of technology to your team and let
your colleagues know how they can use it to their advantage. They should
understand that it will help them manage their time better too and thus
not waste any of it, so it’s a win-win situation.

Timesheet software will help workers be mindful about the time they
spend on their tasks, which improves concentration and fights
distractions. Also, time tracking tools eliminate the pain of accurate 
[payroll
calculation](https://www.actitime.com/features-in-detail/project-cost-and-client-billing?source=post_page---------------------------)
. You’ll never over- or underpay anyone when you have exact data of
their work time expenses.

The main benefit of special time-tracking tools for remote teams is that
every employee feels like they are in charge of their time. At the same
time, they can spot unproductive activities and weak points in their
performance and do something about them.

### Aim to Create a Strong Company Culture

Last but not least, your goal should be not just to have a team that’s
location independent but to build a powerful company culture. This can
happen by getting to know each other, working towards the same goals,
respecting each other’s time and valuing everyone’s skills and talents.

### Pay Close Attention to What is Happening Within the Teams

If, like most offices, you break your work up into teams, make sure
they have mastered highly effective communication within their
respective teams. For example, if your project manager is not on top of
things with the product development team, you will find that some
members of the team are working on aspects of the project that make no
sense in relation to the overall strategy or, worse, that they are
working on the same tasks in different ways. Any team lead of your
distributed teams must be a highly effective communicator, accountable
to you and your fellow executives and have a strong handle at all times
of what every member within his/her team is working on at that time.  

### Hold people accountable

As mentioned, the primary temptation with a remote work situation or for
distributed teams is that people will take advantage and slack off.
That’s why it’s crucial to lay down some goals and expectations for
each employee and ensure that those expectations are being met. Try to
toe the line though between micro-managing and merely communicating
those desires and expectations. In some cases, a remote situation can be
unworkable. If you think this is the case, before making a drastic
change, check the data (e.g. VPN logs).

### Cultivate Trust

Building strong relationships based on trust is a key challenge for
leaders of all types, but the task is especially difficult in the case
of virtual teams. In a remote workplace, trust is often closely
connected to tasks. If a team member struggles to complete their tasks
in a timely fashion, they will have difficulty earning the trust of
people who routinely hold themselves accountable for their work. A good
virtual boss must find ways to help team members develop positive views
of one another, ensuring that they will make an effort to follow through
on the responsibilities.

Keep Decisions Fast and The Team Productive Over Different Time Zones

### Use Comments and Questions

We try really hard to leave a lot of comments on everything we work on
asynchronously. For most teams, this is on JIRA, and we try to make sure
we have really clear specs with a design, a brief and maybe a mock-up,
so when developers are working on it, they will be very clear with their
status. They put in there any questions, so they get unblocked as fast
as possible by a product manager, a designer, or another teammate.

### Be Proactive

We try to move into very thorough, detailed asynchronous communication,
so people know what’s going on with the rest of the team, and they're
getting their questions answered as soon as possible. We also encourage
our team to be proactive and to make most decisions themselves. For
instance, if you get stuck on something, don't wait around for help;
just go do something else, figure out what else is valuable, or even
better, make the decision yourself\!

### Decide If Necessary

Something we really encourage is for people to make a decision and
inform the team. Say,  “I wasn’t sure about A or B; B made more sense to
me, so I went ahead and I did it. If it’s a problem, let me know and
I’ll fix it.” Nine times out of ten, the developer makes a great
decision, and everyone’s happy. Only one time out of ten do they say we
actually needed to do A, but it still saves a lot more time compared to
waiting around, being stuck.

## Address Conflicts

Conflict is almost unavoidable in any collaborative project. Although
the term often has a negative connotation, conflict itself is neither
good nor bad. It simply represents a difference of opinion or a
different evaluation of available information. The way conflict is
managed, however, is what determines whether it has a positive or
negative impact on a team. Effective leaders understand that conflict
can be a valuable and productive opportunity to have a conversation
about an important issue. Managed properly, conflict can be brought to a
positive and productive resolution that actually strengthens
relationships within a team and can enhance collaborative efforts. If
conflict is ignored or handled poorly, however, it can undermine trust
among team members and make it difficult for the team to pursue its
goals effectively. Unfortunately, signs of conflict can be harder to
detect when working in virtual context.A virtual boss has to be
comfortable managing conflict rather than viewing it as something to be
avoided at all costs. Conflict can serve as a valuable growth
opportunity, both for leaders and team members. Throughout the conflict
resolution process, new ideas and solutions are often developed. Remote
managers have the ability to set the tone for managing conflict in their
teams. Rather than creating a confrontational, combative environment,
they can use conflict as an opportunity to bolster collaboration and
bring new information to light. In a remote context, where it may be
harder to recognize when there is a conflict, it’s important to deal
with conflict as directly and as quickly as possible because the nature
of remote work makes it easier for team members to avoid unpleasant
conversations, making it more likely that they’ll fester and grow until
they become unmanageable.Managing a successful remote team can be a
major challenge for leaders accustomed to a more traditional office
environment, but many of the same principles can be applied in a virtual
context. A good virtual boss must work a bit harder to cultivate good
communication and build trust, but with today’s collaborative tools,
they have extensive resources that can help them to get the most out of
their teams.

## Facilitate Collaboration

Remote teams allow organizations to bring together talented people to
collaborate on a specified project even if those people are separated by
distance. One of the most challenging tasks for a virtual boss is to
facilitate that collaboration. Whether they’re managing workflow or
working directly with team members to produce a specific deliverable,
there are many ways that remote leaders can help their teams work
together more effectively.

Team leaders can make it easier for team members to collaborate by
embracing any number of technology tools. Project management software
and virtual chat programs are particularly useful for leading remote
teams since they allow all members to access the same shared resources
and communicate quickly and effectively. Rather than relying upon less
structured channels like email, these solutions provide both visibility
and accountability for team members. A good virtual boss can further
enhance collaboration by holding regular check-in or brainstorming
meetings that allow everyone to update the team on what they’re working
on or seek feedback that might help them overcome a challenge.

## Build Safety

The last thing you want is people who feel unable to ask questions,
propose new ideas or experiment with better solutions. 

> Example:
> 
> Google has been always recognized for encouraging people to feel safe
> and free to contribute wherever they can. 
> 
> ``` 
> Indeed this kind of environment has created the image of people like 
>                 Jeff Dean - the Chuck Norris of Internet. Interestingly, Google was struggling to create a working advertising platform. While Google Adwards is currently the main revenue generator for Google, in the early years their platform did not work well at all! There was a major issue in the algorithms that no one could solve for months. So, during one weekend Jeff Dean fixed this problem, although he was part of a department that had nothing to do with Google Adwards. This shows that when people feel safe, have freedom and autonomy, they can contribute to solving big problems. And these problems might not be a part of their ongoing task!
>                                                                                                                                                                                         
> ```

In order to build safety, you can take specific steps like:

  - organize a special time (e.g sprint retrospectives) when people can
    ask questions freely
  - allow any questions and take them seriously, even from the most
    junior people
  - show people your weaknesses and fallibility – even if you are the
    leader, others must know you are a human being. This would allow
    people to show their problems early on as well
  - don't kill the messenger – thank the people that raise serious
    issues as early as possible. Don't make them feel bad that they
    spotted a problem early on, because the next time they will not let
    you know until it is too late

## Number of Social Interactions Per Week

The best measure of team collaboration is how many times team members
interact. If you are not at the same office, make sure you design
special meetings for interactions. Encourage people to do it even
online.

> Example:
> 
> Tell George to call Stefan, because he has something interesting to
> share\! Or ask your remote team to go together for lunch and give them
> a topic to talk about. It is very inspiring if the topic is not about
> work, rather than something of a higher value, such as how can we stop
> poverty or why did we end up with the situation in Syria.

## The Best and Most Neglected - Shared Experiences

The last one goes to live interaction and having shared fun experiences.
If you doubt the investment of getting people at the same place, I am
personally investing in inviting our partners in joining us during our
team building events. 

These shared experiences are the best way to strengthen the team spirit,
motivate people and show that you care on only what each one delivers at
work, but also you value them as people. 

Is all about the shared sense of pushing towards one goal that drives
people motivation and makes team members engaged. And  [statistics
show](https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/275161) that motivated people
can be as much as 500% more productive than unmotivated ones\! 

I hope you have found some actionable advice on how to get most of the
value from your distributed team. Have fun while applying them\! And
please, share yours in the comments section below.

## Do's and Don'ts of Managing a Remote Developer Team

  - **DO **make sure you invest on 1:1s with your team.
  - **DO **make sure you’re really listening to your team and checking
    in on how they are doing, because you can’t just walk around the
    office and see the dynamic; you need people to tell you. This is the
    most important.
  - **DON’T **be that manager who constantly asks, hey, what’s happening
    with this feature? Hey, what happened with the status? This may be
    the most important don’t. Figure out a system where you are getting
    status updates asynchronously. There’s a ton of tools, so use them\!

References

  - [InfoQ How to Effectively Lead Remote IT
    Teams](https://www.infoq.com/articles/effectively-lead-remote-teams/)
  - [How to Effectively Manage a Remote
    Team](https://medium.com/swlh/how-to-effectively-manage-a-remote-team-b431d79ab15)
  - [5 Ways to Effectively Lead Remote
    Teams](https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/249651)
  - [How to Be a Better Remote
    Manager](https://www.business2community.com/leadership/how-to-be-a-better-remote-manager-02208632)

