###### [Home](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/blob/master/README.md) | [Leadership](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/tree/master/Leadership/README.md) |
------------

# Information Technology : Micromanagement


## Sings you might be a Micromanager

### You hover over everything

When you delegate a task to an employee, you’re constantly “just
checking in.” If you had the option, you would probably embed a tracking
device in your employees.

### You're a know-it-all

You believe you can do everything faster and better than the people who
work for you. After a task is assigned, you take it back when you see
that it’s not going the way you think it should.

#### You require approval

It’s great when employees take initiative and jump on a project. But you
think it’s even better that they run everything by you — even the most
basic task.

#### It's your way or the highway

When you assign out a task, you also assign out the “how.” You need to
make sure employees are performing the task the “right” way.

#### You're indecisive

Discussions never seem to go anywhere. You continue to gather input but
keep asking questions in hopes of finding that perfect decision. Fact
is, you’re beating a dead horse by doing that.

#### You don't understand balance

You want to keep the project moving, so every task is equal in
importance. From a design’s font size to its overall layout, you believe
an employee must put equal amounts of focus into all parts.

#### Work keeps piling up

You don’t trust your employees enough to task out the work, or you like
keeping the fun, creative parts of a project for yourself. And you’re
wondering why you’re drowning?

#### You never stop working

There’s a zombie apocalypse outside? You’re still working. You’re afraid
that everything will go to chaos if you’re not there to lead (control).

#### Your team is unmotivated

Your team’s production rate is low, and they’re avoiding going to your
meetings or talking to you. You can’t be the one to blame, right?

#### Your team has high turnover

You’re unable to retain employees. Sure, they were bright-eyed and
bushy-tailed when they first started, but you’ve worn them down and now
they’re out the door.

“A poor manager will micromanage his or her team. They will see only one
way to accomplish a task and will not value the input of others. Team
members are not encouraged to grow, mistakes are frowned upon and unless
a task is completed exactly as the manager wants it completed (even if
completion in another manner achieves a positive outcome) the manager
won’t recognize the success.”

``` 
– Cynthia Corsetti, CPCC, SPHR, Executive Leadership Coach at Cynthia Corsetti Coaching, LLC
            
```

“Bad managers fail to give their team personal independence. They
over-delegate and over-assign. Employees who feel they don’t have
freedom will become disillusioned and frustrated.”

``` 
– Nicholas Hobson, Workplace Psychologist and Co-Founder of PsychologyCompass.com
            
```

“Controlling your team in minute detail is a terrible trait for a
manager. You should hire a team you trust to do the work and give them
the freedom to carry it out. Micromanaging leads to a lack of motivation
and creativity\!”

``` 
- Matt Reaney, Founder of Big Cloud
            
```

“Treating employees like school children is a surefire way to demotivate
your team. The best way to avoid micromanagement is to set up clear
KPIs. If your team is consistently hitting their numbers, there’s no
reason to monitor/manage how they get things done. For example, if your
sales employees are consistently hitting their goals, there’s no reason
to monitor their customer communications or make a big fuss about what
time they come into work and leave each day.”

``` 
- David Scarola, Vice President of  The Alternative Board
            
```

“A clear-cut sign of a bad manager is someone who jumps in and takes
over every time there is a problem, even the slightest one. If your
employees are resistant to bringing problems to you, because they fear
you’ll take it over, there’s a good chance you are doing something
wrong. A great manager rejects the dependence of the their teammates and
instead asks 'how would you solve this problem if I wasn’t here?' The
\#1 role of a manager is to grow people, and when you solve a problem
for them nobody grows.”

``` 
- Kevin Armstrong, Owner of The Alternative Board – Vancouver
            
```

## Leadership and Micromangement

One of the greatest misunderstandings in leadership and coaching is the
term micromanaging. Most leaders never want to be thought of as a
micromanager. In fact, it could be considered an insult or weakness of
any manager.

When micromanaging is used as a coaching or leadership style, it will
most likely deliver bad results, stifle creativity, limit employees’
self-worth, and limit productivity. On the other hand, when a coach or
leader must deal with a bad performer, it is imperative to help the
employee either become a better performer or help them find a job that
is a better fit. Leaders should strive to be coaches who, when
necessary, use micromanaging activities to improve specific areas, but
use coaching skills when getting the team ready to win.

Micromanagement is essentially watching, or making employees feel that
their every move is being watched. Excessive attention to detail,
planning tasks to minutiae, and obsessively tracking the time employees
spend at their desks, on their breaks, etc. are some of the more extreme
activities associated with micromanagement. While this may seem to some
like the work managers should be doing, these behaviors are, in fact,
detrimental and take managers’ focus away from the bigger picture.

Micromanagement has been proven to be a stressful management style that
achieves results only in the short term, and can be extremely taxing on
both team members and management. While there are much better ways to
lead teams and achieve long-term results, there are situations where
micromanagement becomes essential. With this knowledge, and an
understanding of how much pressure the team can handle, micromanagement
can be used as a short-term tool to achieve results when a project is
slipping and all other methods have failed.

**Empowerment** can be defined as the process of enabling (or
authorising) an individual to think, behave, act, and control work and
decision making in autonomous ways. It is not an implementation, and is
only partly a strategy. Rather, it is a philosophy; it is the state of
feeling self-empowered to take control of one’s own future and foster a
culture wherein this state can thrive.

It is important that employees feel connected to the company strategy,
their role, their leaders, and their team in order to secure their
willingness to give discretionary effort and commitment to stay with the
company.

Empowered employees are engaged employees. They have all the tools they
need to learn and grow, connect with colleagues and others throughout
the company, make their own decisions, be leaders, and contribute to the
success of the business. Put another way, empowerment is a key driver of
engagement.

### Why Are Micromanaging and Coaching Often Confused?

Micromanaging and coaching are often confused because, from the surface,
the activities and the leader’s involvement look very similar. The key
difference is the leader’s intent and the desired goals of their
actions. Both require the involvement of the coach/leader—setting clear
expectations, having a well-defined activity management, accountability,
and a huge time commitment from the leader as well as the employees. The
key difference lies in the purpose of these activities. For example:

Coaches/leaders set expectations to ensure there is complete
understanding of what is expected from each employee in order to
maximise productivity and limit confusion, whereas a micromanager does
this with the intent to set boundaries and rules.

Coaches/leaders show commitment to the team by holding everyone
accountable; on the other hand, micromanagers use accountability to
ensure employees are earning their paychecks (oftentimes, focusing on a
single employee versus the team).

Coaches/leaders manage activities to ensure employees are on the right
track and that they are in the best position to succeed, and a
micromanager uses the activities to justify effort or discipline.

Overall, the intent of coaching is to develop and prepare employees to
succeed using the leader’s knowledge and experience to guide them, not
to justify actions.

<kbd>![](http://www.conduit.consulting/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/main-qimg-c28e27213a014ec7d11f00e7406981a3-300x93.gif)</kbd>

### When to Micromanage, and for How Long?

Let’s say there is an employee who appears to be unhappy, and their
activities and results are not meeting expectations. The leader should
get involved early to determine if the shortcoming is a lack of desire
or ability, or both. To help determine the issue, the leader should
implement more disciplined expectations and activities and explain to
the employee why this action is being taken, as well as the desired
outcome. The desired outcome should be to either help the employee reach
the expected activities, attitude, and results or help them find a role
that is a better fit. These micromanaging activities should be
short-term activities.

The leader needs to make assessments quickly and take on the continued
shortcomings, which results in moving the employee out of the position.
In turn, leaders should also take quick action to recognise great
efforts and achievements as warranted. A leader should not have to
implement a micromanaging activity for an employee for more than 90
days, and it can be stopped in as little as 30 days depending on the
level of involvement, improvement, and accountability, as well as the
overall attitude and commitment of the employee.

### Trust and Independence for the Team

The complaint that most people have about their current job has to do
with their perceived level of autonomy and independence in their current
role. And what does that boil down to? Studies indicate that more often
than not, it can be attributed, in part, to how closely their immediate
supervisor or manager dictates the nuances and production details of the
work created by their employees.

There are plenty of examples of managers who strike that balance where
they are high-touch, but are not encroaching on the autonomy of their
employees in their pursuit to produce good work. These employers
typically get the most out of their teams—not only in terms of work
quality, but morale as well.

### Here are a few ways that they successfully manage employees closely—without micromanaging.

1.  **Keep casual**, open lines of communication with your team.
    Micromanagement often boils down to the frequency with which a
    manager communicates with their team. If the only thing you
    communicate with the team about is how they can be doing their work
    differently or better, that is a problem. Employees need to
    understand how highly they’re valued; if you’re constantly picking
    apart the work that an employee produces because it isn’t up to your
    standards—and that is the extent to which you communicate—how
    responsive do you think they’re going to be to your feedback after a
    while? Short answer: not very.  One tip that can help keep lines of
    communication open is to take your team out to lunch or to the local
    bar when not on the clock. Show them that your relationship doesn’t
    have to simply be a working one, but that it can be a social one
    too.
2.  **Set expectations** early. Another contributor to micromanagement
    is when there is a fundamental misunderstanding or miscommunication
    between the manager and team members. If this breakdown in
    expectation-setting occurs, it becomes hard for employees to produce
    work that the manager wants to see, which, in turn, opens the door
    for—you guessed it—micromanagement.  So, if you’re able to set
    clear-cut expectations early on, you are more likely to see work
    that aligns with those expectations. It gives your team enough time
    to assess how they can go about achieving the quality of work you
    want to see, and eliminates any guesswork on the part of the team
    that may lead to ill-advised strategy or production.  A great way to
    accomplish this is to hold an internal kick-off meeting before
    embarking on a new project or task. This is where you meet with your
    team and tell them how you envision the final product to look, go
    over any key performance indicators (KPIs) that need to be
    addressed, and address any immediate sources of confusion or
    concerns that your team has. This way, you can create a clear and
    concise game plan and forge ahead with the project.
3.  **Check in regularly**. Having a regular time to touch base with
    each of your staff members about their work will keep you focused on
    their results and will create a place for you to check on how
    projects are coming along, give feedback, and agree on
    prioritisation—and will set you both up well to let them go forth
    and pursue their goals with an appropriate amount of autonomy the
    rest of the time.
4.  **Take on concerns**. When work isn’t progressing as you’d like, or
    a staff member isn’t approaching the job in the way you’d expect,
    talk about it; whether that means giving simple feedback, working to
    develop a staff member’s skills, or tackling a serious performance
    issue or a fundamental problem with fitting the role.
5.  **Trust** those to whom you delegate. It always starts with trust.
    Along with trust, you also have to give the people to whom you
    delegate the chance to do a job their way. Of course, the work must
    be done well, but your way or the highway is not the right way.
    Effective leaders offer and inspire the kind of trust that
    encourages empowerment and productivity. If your group has suffered
    from lagging performance lately, don’t blame it all on your workers.
    You may have kept them on too short a leash, not allowing them
    enough operational freedom to do their jobs, or you may have failed
    to provide the training and tools they need. Worse, you may have
    been wasting time redoing their work rather than helping them do
    their jobs better.
6.  **Delegate** responsibility and authority, not just the task.
    Managers who fail to delegate responsibility in addition to specific
    tasks eventually find themselves reporting to their subordinates and
    doing some of the work, rather than vice versa. And, finally, there
    is the most important and easiest task, but something that many
    leaders fail to do: Effectively sharing your authority requires an
    open, honest attitude, combined with the following characteristics:
    Positive motivation: Use perks, time off, promotions, public
    recognition, handwritten cards, team morale boosters, and monetary
    rewards to inspire exceptional performance.  Leadership role
    modeling: Demonstrate the behaviors you want to see in others
    through your actions. Nothing kills morale faster than a manager who
    demands people stay late and then leaves at 4:30 to make an early
    tee-off time, or one who insists you keep your inbox empty, but
    his or hers is a black hole. The proper tools: Employees may need
    up-to-date training, upgraded technology, or the right office
    supplies. Not being able to do your work efficiently—such as if
    you’re not in “a job level that qualifies for a smartphone or your
    own printer”—is frustrating and wastes time.
7.  **Give** public and written  **credit**. This is the simplest step,
    but one of the hardest for many people to learn. It will inspire
    loyalty, provide real satisfaction for work done, and become the
    basis for mentoring and performance reviews.
8.  **Partner for empowermen**t. The final stage of leadership and
    management utopia is transforming an empowered employee into a
    partner. Tom Peters, the guru of management gurus, once said:
    “Management is about arranging and telling. Leadership is about
    nurturing and enhancing.” The leader should be more concerned about
    retention and reward for the “employee partner” and not with the
    product quality. An employee you can trust as a partner allows you
    to move to other endeavors while simultaneously not worrying about
    the company that you have built thus far. Micromanagement has its
    place; partnering has its place. The key is to understand when each
    is needed. That’s the role of the leader.

### Conclusion

Giving up control and empowering your team can be a terrifying
experience for many leaders. You might feel compelled to watch their
every move and peek over their shoulders. But by monitoring someone’s
every move, you’re actually impeding their ability to grow. Give your
team some space, trust them, and you might be impressed by what they’re
able to achieve. I personally think that the future of work lies in
self-managing teams and individuals, where managers act like coaches to
support their team members. If your team members truly feel that their
contributions and ideas are being heard (that they’re empowered instead
of micromanaged), they begin to feel an increased sense of ownership and
engagement.

### Autonomy Gets What Micromanaging Never Will

<kbd>![](https://s3.amazonaws.com/media.eremedia.com/wp-content/uploads/sites/4/2019/03/27121802/manager-micromanager-bad-700x467.jpg)</kbd>

### The benefits of autonomy

> “Autonomy is the antithesis of micromanagement.” — Joan F. Cheverie

Autonomy is our desire for choice. It’s the feeling that we manage our
own actions. And it’s not just about the ability to choose  —  it’s also
about creating the options. There’s little that even money can do to
offset feeling oppressed at a job, as described in this 
[Quartz](https://qz.com/676144/why-its-your-call-is-the-best-thing-you-can-say-to-keep-employees-happy/) piece.

When a workplace enables autonomy:

  - **People feel more valued — **Having a say in how things are done
    creates a sense of ownership  —  employees are committed, not just
    transactional.
  - **It alleviates negative emotions — **Neuroscientist Steven Maier of
    Colorado University 
    [found](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3181837/) that
    it’s easier to manage our emotions when we’re in control. Stressors
    we can’t control are far more damaging than stressors we feel we
    have some control over.
  - **It makes the job more attractive — “**People were nearly two and a
    half times more likely to take a job that gave them more autonomy
    than they were to want a job that gave them more influence” in one
    study, as 
    [reported](https://www.thecut.com/2016/03/all-anyone-really-wants-at-work-is-autonomy.md) in 
    *New York Magazine*.
  - **It drives loyalty — **Motivation expands when people feel in
    control, as described by Harry E. Chambers in his 2004 book,  *[My
    Way or the Highway: The Micromanagement Survival
    Guide.](https://www.amazon.com/My-Way-Highway-Micromanagement-Survival/dp/1576752968)*
  - **It increases productivity: ** [Studies have
    shown](https://goo.gl/VKoJrS) that autonomy makes people more
    efficient.

### Autonomy and accountability

The opposite of control is not total independence. Autonomy is not total
independence  —  it’s a collective mindset that increases team
performance.

Not understanding the critical distinction between autonomy and
independence makes managers afraid of delegating authority. They
associate “freedom” with lower performance and accountability. Though it
sounds counterintuitive, genuine autonomy amplifies both freedom 
*and *responsibility.

To help managers and employees see this, we must reframe the reward
system at work. We need to move from a carrot-and-stick approach to an
intrinsically motivated approach. As Daniel Pink describes in his book 
*[Drive](https://www.amazon.com/Drive-Surprising-Truth-About-Motivates/dp/1594484805)*
, we must  [focus on three
elements](https://www.tlnt.com/what-your-employees-really-want-and-how-you-can-give-it-to-them/):
Autonomy, Mastery, and Purpose.

As Pink explains, our brains are wired to self-direct. We don’t want
others telling us how to do things; we want to feel in control. We need
to have autonomy over our tasks (what we do), our time (when we do it),
the team (who we do it with), and the technique (how we do it). Spotify,
for example, is organized in small cross-functional teams known as “
[Squads](https://medium.com/project-management-learnings/spotify-squad-framework-part-i-8f74bcfcd761)”
 —  each has the autonomy to decide ****what to build, how to build it,
and how to work together.

Autonomy and accountability are not opposing forces that must be
balanced. Promoting autonomy encourages people to become more
accountable to themselves and others. It creates a virtuous cycle.

### Belonging drives accountability

> “Great leaders don’t want the attention, but they use it. They use it
> to unite the tribe and to reinforce its sense of purpose.” —
> Seth Godin

We are social animals. Our culture is shaped by the groups, or tribes,
we belong to. In his book 
*[Tribes](https://www.amazon.com/Tribes-We-Need-You-Lead/dp/1491514736)*
, Seth Godin defines a “tribe” as a group of people who share interests
and communication styles. Members of a tribe are connected to one
another, connected to a leader, and connected to an idea.

Great teams are like tribes. People want to connect with a leader and an
idea . They want to join a mission, not just a job, as I wrote 
[here](https://www.tlnt.com/hire-for-a-mission-not-a-job/). People want
connection and growth. They want to be accountable to something larger
than themselves.

When teams behave like tribes, they increase their chances of success.
They become tighter and more fluid entities. They become great at
recruiting and immersing newcomers. They also become skilled at
identifying and rejecting those who lower the bar.

Spotify’s “Squads” define their own missions, develop their own goals,
and how they work  —  they are tribes with end-to-end responsibilities.

Godin describes how great leadership creates the conditions for tribes
to form and thrive: “A leader can help increase the effectiveness of the
tribe and its members by transforming the shared interest into a
passionate goal and desire for change; providing tools to allow members
to tighten their communications; and leveraging the tribe to allow it to
grow and gain new members.”

When a team becomes a tribe, the role of the leader doesn’t lose
importance — it evolves into something much more meaningful.

### Getting started

How managers introduce a challenge or kick off a new project can
encourage the  *feeling* of autonomy, or hinder it  —  and perception
matters as much as reality.

Here are some tips for leaders who want to  [foster strong, autonomous
tribes](https://www.tlnt.com/four-steps-to-creating-a-supportive-culture-of-employee-autonomy/):

  - **Recognize that your job is to lead  *people*, not to manage
    tasks.** You must  [work through
    others](https://www.tlnt.com/how-to-follow-up-without-being-a-pain-in-the-rear-micromanager/) to
    accomplish a mission.
  - **Start small. **Promising full autonomy and then cutting back on
    “freedom” not only backfires,  it erodes trust and credibility.
    It’s always better to surprise than to overpromise.
  - **Set expectations up front**. For every project, be clear on what
    you want to achieve and on the rules of engagement. What’s the
    mission? How much accountability will the team have? Will they need
    to check in with you at certain stages? If you have doubts or fears,
    share those with your team  —  change is navigating uncertainty.
    People expect leaders to be honest, not to be perfect.
  - **Be patient.**It takes time for a team to turn into a
    high-performing tribe. People sometimes turn into “dictators” when
    they receive more power ;  through time, they’ll find balance. Be
    ready for some chaos at the beginning of the process.
  - **Reframe mistakes as learning moments. **To experiment with “new
    ways of crossing the river,” people must make mistakes. Create a
    habit of  [turning errors into
    lessons](https://www.tlnt.com/the-powerful-and-lasting-lessons-you-get-from-failure/).
    At WD-40, mistakes are called “ [learning
    moments](http://marciaconner.com/dl/ridge-primer-p12-15.pdf)”  —
     they can be positive or negative, but are never considered bad.
    Employees openly and freely share mistakes because they understand
    that though mistakes come and go, learning is forever.
  - **Promote collective autonomy. **Providing people with more freedom
    to speak and make choices doesn’t mean they’ll do what they want.
    It’s always about what’s better for the tribe, not for a
    particular individual.
  - **Focus on the mission. ** [Leading
    change](https://www.tlnt.com/6-essential-leadership-responsibilities-that-build-effective-teams/) by
    delegating authority involves specifying the desired outcome,
    putting a team in charge, and letting them design a way to get
    there. Challenge your team to find a way to cross the river rather
    than asking them to build a bridge.
  - **Focus on accountability, not just goals. **Autonomy and
    accountability are two sides of the same coin. Expectations for each
    role must be clear and aligned with the distributed authority. In
    Holacracy, a self-management practice, accountability usually begins
    with an -ing verb to convey that it’s an ongoing activity (and not a
    one-time project or action).  [Check out this
    post ](https://blog.holacracy.org/writing-roles-accountabilities-in-holacracy-eb9d83e363bf)on
    for more on crafting accountabilities.
  - **Set level expectations.**Clarity is critical. Educate your team on
    the power of autonomy and how to implement it throughout your
    organization. Most importantly, focus on the  *why*: What are you
    trying to achieve?
  - **Simplify your rules. **Most organizations build their policies
    with a micromanagement mindset. Take a close look at both your
    employee handbook and the unwritten rules you mention in meetings.
    Is everything forbidden unless it is permitted? Or is it everything
    allowed unless it’s forbidden? General Motors’ CEO narrowed down its
    dress code policy to  [just two
    words](https://work.qz.com/1242801/gms-dress-code-is-only-two-words/):
    “dress accordingly.”
  - **Include your team along the way. **Promoting autonomy with a
    top-down approach would be ironic. Your team should be involved from
    the beginning, especially when setting up expectations, clarifying
    the problem to be fixed, and aligning on the ideal outcome. Early
    involvement not only minimizes resistance and noise down the line,
    it promotes ownership.

Autonomy is more rewarding than money. People want to join a mission and
become part of a tribe, not to be told how **to work. They want to be
the source of their own action.

Letting go of power may make many leaders nervous, but micromanagement
is what really hinders an organization’s potential. It cannot be scaled.
The same applies when implementing autonomy at your company: there’s no
universal solution, no one-size-fits-all method for developing strong,
agile, high-functioning tribes. Every company must find its own way.

## Negatively Affects of Micromanagement

### Decreased Productivity


Constant surveillance along with excessive tweaking and input decrease
productivity. Employees have to slow down in their work to process and
implement the continuous input and changes to their workflow. It can
also lead them to second-guess their ability to complete tasks
independently. This results in a staff that becomes dependent on their
manager for guidance in completing their work. Micromanagers essentially
retain all of the authority employees need to take responsibility for
doing their jobs. They also risk losing the advantages of their
employees’ unique insights, skills, and talents because they have
conditioned them to only do what they are told to do. People who
micromanage also forgo opportunities to help their organizations more
because they are putting more time into the lower level jobs of their
employees instead of the more important work for which they are
responsible.

### Increased Employee Turnover

Chronic micromanagement often leads people to quit their jobs. It
destroys the manager/ employee relationship. The persistent monitoring
of everything they do, repetitively going over every element of their
job, and redoing their work the way the micromanager would do it drains
talented employees and sends them looking for work elsewhere. The
momentum of the department decreases due to constant training and
re-training staff. The time, effort, and resources required to hire and
train replacements negatively impacts the company’s bottom line as well.

### Morale is Lowered

When micromanaged, employees begin to feel a loss of autonomy. When this
happens, they’ll slowly lose the desire to go the extra mile for a task
and taking pride in what they do. They’ll limit themselves to what is
demanded from their manager. Essentially, they stop trying, and their
engagement levels fall. Micromanagers unintentionally or intentionally
discourage others from making decisions by pushing aside the experience
and knowledge of their employees when they take control over their work.

### Loss of Trust

Micromanagement destroys trust. Employees should feel trusted and valued
by their manager and organization especially when it comes to doing
their job. When micromanagers stifle an employee’s decision-making, it
gives the employee the impression that the manager doesn’t trust them or
believe in their abilities enough to complete the task at hand.
Micromanagers can make employees feel powerless, unable to use their own
resources, knowledge, and initiative to figure things out. Without
trust, employees become resentful and disloyal. They either take their
talents to another company or they stay and become deadweight, waiting
for their manager’s instructions.

### Teamwork Is Destroyed

A micromanaged workplace discourages teamwork as employees work less
with each other and more or only with the micromanager. This can make
employees feel undervalued and unappreciated. Teamwork creates synergy,
empowers, and promotes better communication to achieve goals faster.
Micromanagers undermine teamwork through their refusal or inability to
delegate and their knack for criticizing and immersing themselves in the
work of others. Their actions suppress creativity and insult the talent
of their employees.  The organization as a whole misses out on the
benefits of having a highly effective team that is also collaborative
and creatively solves problems.

### Reduced Innovation

Employee engagement drives innovation, and empowering employees helps
increase engagement rates. Micromanagement disempowers employees by not
allowing them to get results in ways that work for them. This makes them
feel less accountable for their results and less engaged. Micromanagers
underutilize their employees’ skills, knowledge, and talent by
controlling their every movement. They leave no room for employees to
critique and improve their own processes to develop their expertise.
When micromanagers treat their employees as order-takers, they diminish
their capacity to innovate. Demanding creativity while jumping in to
make decisions and adding pressure to work a certain way does not create
a work environment conducive to innovation.

### Health Problems Arise

Micromanagers over time exert a heavy toll on their employees’ health.
Micromanagement increases employee stress that can affect both work and
home life. An employee who has a hard time at work may give family and
friends a hard time outside of work, thus damaging those relationships.
It can also drive employees to smoke, drink, and overeat. This in turn
leads to other health issues such as increased risk of heart attack,
high blood pressure, and sleep problems. Employees whose manager is
verbally or emotionally abusive experience emotional strain and lowered
self-esteem. Being controlled at work without the ability to make
decisions makes employees more likely to become depressed.

### Wrapping It All Up

Managers should exercise control with clear direction and guidance for
employees to follow. Once their employees learn their duties and
responsibilities, they should be encouraged to perform their job
independently while asking questions as needed to perform tasks. Through
this process, employees are learning to be capable, confident and
independent. Job satisfaction, creativity and morale increase. While
some attributes of micromanaging may be necessary to perform certain
duties in the workplace, they do not offer any benefits to productivity
or employee engagement.

References

  - [Eleap Software - 7 ways micromanagement negatively affects
    employees](https://www.eleapsoftware.com/7-ways-micromanagement-negatively-affects-employees/)
  - [Talent Management & HR - autonomy gets what micromanaging never
    will](https://www.tlnt.com/autonomy-gets-what-micromanaging-never-will/)
  - [Conduit Consulting - Leadership and
    micromanagement](https://www.conduit.consulting/leadership-and-micromanagement/)

