###### [Home](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/blob/master/README.md) | [Leadership](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/tree/master/Leadership/README.md) |
------------


# Information Technology : Signs your employee likes you

Are you striking the right balance between commanding respect and
appearing accessible? Are your employees responding well to your style
of leadership? Are any of your actions breeding resentment in the
office?

Being a good boss is crucial for your organization — a third of
employees in one survey revealed that they'd quit a job because of a bad
manager

But you can't exactly go wandering around the office begging people to
tell you how you're doing. You're better off organizing employee
satisfaction surveys and soliciting feedback from your direct reports.

You can also take a look at these other, more subtle signs that you're
killing it as a boss:

## You don't have obvious favorites

Playing favorites is a great way to torpedo office morale. If you make
it clear that a certain person is the apple of your eye no matter what,
then that'll just encourage your other employees to give up on trying to
impress you.

## You treat your employees like human beings

Unfortunately, some bosses seem to feel that hurling insults and abuse
at people is an effective motivational technique. In most cases, this
simply isn't true. If you value your employees as human beings, then
you're already a huge step above many managers.

## You're willing to try new things

Good bosses adopt certain methods because they're the best way of doing
things — not because they've just fallen into certain habits. The best
managers give their employees a little room to experiment and innovate.

## You hold everyone accountable...

Maintaining accountability is a big part of office morale, and it
encourages workers to act with integrity, leading to an excellent
workplace culture.

## ... including yourself

Good bosses don't pick a scapegoat or explain away mistakes. In fact,
experienced managers admit it when they fail in order to create a
workplace that's a safe environment for experimentation.

## You ask politely

Insecure bosses bark out orders and behave like divas in order to
establish their dominance. If you always say the magic word and are
generally polite, then that's definitely a good sign.

## You give support

Bosses should build trust with their employees by providing a reasonable
amount of support and guidance. Obviously, you don't need to hold
anyone's hand, but throwing people into the deep end isn't ideal,
either.

## You remove obstacles

Bad bosses throw up roadblocks that make it harder for people to succeed
and do their jobs. Great managers should actively work to make the lives
of their employees easier.

## You're a good coach

Coaches don't just sit back on the sidelines twiddling their thumbs. But
they don't run onto the field and start playing, either — unless they're
that one scary dad who takes the youth recreational soccer league way
too seriously.

Good bosses are like good coaches: They command respect and provide the
right blend of praise and constructive criticism to bring out the best
in their employees.

## You're able to manage expectations

Bad bosses often disappoint or confuse their teams by presenting
inaccurate pictures about how things are at the office — e.g., talking
up how well the company's doing and then springing news of layoffs on
everyone. Good managers are honest and open.

## You give feedback

Good employees crave feedback to learn how they can improve and grow.
Great bosses are happy to oblige.

## You keep the environment open and transparent

Transparency makes for  [a happy office
culture.](http://www.businessinsider.com/how-transparent-is-your-workplace-2014-9)

## You ask for insight

Employees want to feel heard.

Obviously, at the end of the day, you're responsible for making the
final judgment. But once in a while, if the situation calls for it, good
bosses reach out to their workers to get their insights and opinions.

## You explain yourself

Good managers don't expect anyone to read their minds. They outline a
clear vision and provide their team with the knowledge and tools to
achieve it.

## You care about solutions

When the going gets tough, the weak bosses find someone to blame. Good
managers focus on finding a solution to the problem, rather than
throwing people under the bus.

## You care about challenging your employees

Bored workers are unhappy workers. The best bosses check in with their
workers to ensure that they're being challenged.

## You don't micromanage, but you're not too hands-off

Carefully examine the capabilities of your workers in order to achieve a
good balance. Could you give any of them more responsibilities? Is there
anything you can start delegating?

## You check in with your employees

You don't pop in to nag people like Bill Lumbergh in "Office Space." You
genuinely check in to talk to — not  *at* — your employees in order to
find out their goals and worries.

## You have a sense of humor

It's important to never take the joking too far in the office. That
being said, good bosses take their work seriously — not themselves. It's
good to have a laugh with your employees.

## You care about the dreams and goals of your employees

The best bosses are invested in their employees. That means that they're
actively concerned with the professional goals and aspirations of their
workers.

## You're not nice just for the sake of being nice

Being too nice of a boss can actually be rather cruel, as Betty Liu
points out in a LinkedIn article. Artificially sweet managers heap on
undeserved praise, then yank the rug out from under their employees
later on.

So don't play nice because you don't like conflict. Be authentic and
real with your workers. You'll be doing them a big favor.

## You're a good listener

This is the main reason why introverts make quite good bosses.

Many people have had a manager who  *loved* to talk. Rarer — and
infinitely more appreciated — are those bosses who are quality
listeners. Good listening skills shows your employees that you're
seriously considering their opinions and needs.

## You take an interest in your employees' lives

Good bosses don't cross the line into nosiness. Still, they care enough
to ask about peoples' summer plans, kids, and elderly parents. This
interest will demonstrate to employees that their boss actually cares
about them, making both parties more invested in their working
relationship.

## You tailor your approach

Different employees have different needs. "One size fits all" just isn't
going to cut it in the workplace. The best bosses are flexible. This
allows them to fulfill all sorts of roles in order to better cater to
the needs of their workers.

## You demand effort, not perfection

Great leaders demand — and inspire — employees to work hard. They lead
by example and give workers the tools they need to succeed through hard
work.

Bosses who are too rigid are simply unrealistic. People make mistakes.
It happens. If you punish small failures, you'll just stifle innovation,
experimentation and proactivity in your office.

## You suspect you're an awful leader sometimes

When  [Business Insider previously spoke with author Simon Sinek about
leadership](http://www.businessinsider.com/thinking-youre-a-good-leader-could-mean-youre-a-terrible-one-2016-10),
he explained that individuals who believe themselves to be excellent
leaders are often, in fact, terrible leaders.

Great bosses recognize that authority and rank do not equal leadership
abilities. As a result, they are constantly working to improve
themselves. These quality bosses might even feel inadequate at times.

However, just the fact that they recognize their own flaws renders them
superior to many managers that totally lack self-awareness.

References

  - [Business Insider - signs you are a good
    boss](https://www.businessinsider.com/signs-you-are-a-good-boss-2017-6)

