###### [Home](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/blob/master/README.md) | [Leadership](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/tree/master/Leadership/README.md) |
------------

# Leadership : Signs your employee secretly hate you

## You've got a (bad) gut feeling

"The very first sign that things are going awry in your relationships
with employees is a general gnawing feeling that you can't put your
finger on," Taylor says. "No manager can be liked by everyone, but there
are far too many bosses who are not respected by enough of their staff."
If you've got that gut feeling something is off, be aware and start
looking for other signs.

## They can't maintain eye contact with you (but can with everyone else).

It's difficult for an employee who is angry to look you straight in the
eye, says Taylor. "They're afraid that you may be able to detect
hostility, so the path of least resistance is for them to look away or
avoid being around you wherever possible."

## They avoid you like the proverbial plague.

If you notice they take the stairs every time you're waiting for the
elevator, or they manage their schedules in such a way that they rarely
overlap with your primary work hours, that's a good sign they're
avoiding you. And employees typically only avoid people who intimidate
them or who they don't like

## They call in sick a lot, especially due to stress-related reasons

Having an employee who goes on "stress leave" or constantly calls in
sick could be a sign that they are not comfortable working under your
direction, Kerr explains.

"Your employee(s) may not be showing up at work as often, may come to
work late, leave early, or are just seemingly never at their desks,
because of long, needed breaks," adds Taylor. "Leaving the scene can
take many forms — and it's a common way that your staff copes with
stress. A bad boss-employee relationship is a leading cause of stress
and illness,"

## They don't smile around you

We're not talking about the occasional bad day or mood swing. If one or
more of your employees seem to look  *miserable* every time they're
around you — but you've seen them smiling while talking to others in the
office — something isn't right.

"It's difficult for any employee to put on a happy face when they're
talking to someone they \[dislike\],"

## They stop laughing and bantering the moment you walk into the room

Not smiling when they're around you is one thing — but clamming up when
you step into the office kitchen or conference room is a pretty strong
sign that your employees  *really *don't like you and don't consider you
part of their inner circle

## They seem less passionate about their work than they used to be

You may not be the reason for this (so many things affect one's level of
motivation or enthusiasm at work) — but you  *could* be. "If their level
of enthusiasm has waned, and you're not seeing your staff jump at the
opportunity to help out on new or existing projects anymore, it may be a
sign you're disliked

## They never invite you to social events

If your employees don't include you in any after-work social events or
happy hours, it very well may be because they don't want to spend any
more time with you than they absolutely have to.

## They communicate with you via email, when they talk to others in person

"Your unhappy employees may change the way they communicate with you,
such as through email, voicemail, or IM, instead of in-person
communications," Taylor explains. "You may detect less personal contact,
so that there is less of an opportunity for potential confrontation."

## They're short with you

If you ask, "How's it going?" and they always respond with "Ok" or
"Fine" — or if their emails to always get straight to the point, and
never begin with a friendly "Hello" or "Good afternoon," this may be a
sign they're not a huge fan of you.

"If your employees are beginning to sound like your moody teenager, then
that's a pretty big red flag,"

## They give off negative body language

Whether it's a subtle eye roll or constantly assuming a closed-off
position with arms folded across their chest, your employees' body
language will often reveal their true feelings towards you

## Their door is always closed

**"**Many employees don't have the luxury of their own office these
days, but if they do, and their door appears closed more often than not,
they may be commiserating with friends, family, or even other
colleagues,"

"They may be seeking advice, or worse, checking out greener pastures."

## They constantly disagree with you

"Not all employees shy away from confronting the personality clashes as
they pertain to business, thankfully," says Taylor. "You may find that
your staff seems increasingly more difficult and disagreeable, whereas
before you were never questioned. This may be because before, they
tolerated a more dictatorial management style — but now they've realized
that they have nothing to lose by challenging you, in the hopes that
they will see changes."

## They resign for no good reason

Scads of surveys indicate that "the boss" still ranks as a top reason
for employees leaving a job. If they don't provide a good excuse or
reason for leaving, there's a good chance it's you.

References

  - [Business Insider- signs your employees secretly hate
    you](https://www.businessinsider.com/signs-your-employees-secretly-hate-you-2015-9)

