###### [Home](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/blob/master/README.md) | [Leadership](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/tree/master/Leadership/README.md) |
------------

# Information Technology : Signs People are about to leave

## There's a change in their appearance

If they start dressing unusually sharply, it may be because they are
slipping out to job interviews during or after work, says Kerr.

"Also, if someone is unhappy in their job, they may begin to dress down
because they feel that no one is really paying attention anyway — or
because they just don't really care anymore," adds Taylor.

## You hear other companies are interested in them

If this is your best employee, it's not so surprising that they're
highly sought-after in their field. Once you hear other companies are
requesting meetings with this person, you may have something to worry
about.

## They start taking more time off

If this employee is normally doesn't miss work, but then begins calling
in sick more often, or using up their vacation days sporadically, it may
mean they are feeling very disengaged at work, possibly even to the
point of using the time off to search for other employment, says Kerr.

"And using up their sick days and vacation time (and even getting a lot
of dental work done suddenly) might be a red flag that they are getting
ready to jump ship and want to make sure they max out any benefits they
feel owed to them."

## They show a drop off in any interest in work

Have you noticed that one of your top employees has stopped offering
helpful suggestions or ideas at meetings, they offer little input into
new projects, or seem suddenly disinterested in any of the broader
details related to work? 

"This can be a sign they've lost their mojo and no longer really care
what happens down the road because they know they won't be there in the
future," Kerr says.

## They were recently passed over for a promotion or a raise they deserved

When someone is up for a raise or promotion (that they deserve) and they
don't get it, it can be very frustrating and discouraging.

The employee will likely feel undervalued and may be inclined to go look
for employment with a company that would appreciate and reward them for
their contributions.

## They lack a sense of humor

Employees who are about to bail may no longer joke around, says Taylor.
"Their demeanor is more straightforward and factual versus friendly and
lighthearted. Perhaps this is because they're less worried about
appearing supportive or trying to impress anyone."

## You can read it in their body language and facial expressions

Subtle clues might give hints that your employees are either disengaged
or even feeling guilty because they've been job hunting and they know
that they are not sticking around for the long run, Kerr explains.

## They seem distant

Do you feel a sudden chill when you approach one of your employees? "The
first few times, you chalk up to their having a bad day. Then you notice
it among more team members ... more frequently," says Taylor. If this is
the case, one or more employees may be preparing to leave.

## They've been demoted

Similarly to being passed over for a promotion, an employee who is
demoted will likely feel pretty dejected and may decide to take their
talents elsewhere. If they happen to be one of your top employees, a
demotion can be especially difficult and frustrating for them.

## There's a noted change in attitude

They may become more irritable, or they may make more sarcastic comments
than normal about work-related issues, revealing a lack of fundamental
belief in the direction the company is headed, says Kerr.

A sudden lack of enthusiasm is also a big sign you may be losing one or
more of your employees, Taylor adds.

## There are changes in their behavior

If they are acting differently — maybe they're suddenly keeping to
themselves more and more, or they begin going out to lunch with
coworkers every day — the employee may be pulling away from work
or commiserating with colleagues.

"If ****any team members who rarely went to lunch together before are
now doing so, they may be discussing their plans to move on," says
Taylor. "Seeing new behavior in who goes to lunch and how
often, however, is certainly no cause for concern if other signs are
not evident."

## They're underpaid

If you know for a fact that this employee is  [worth more than your
company is paying
them](http://www.businessinsider.com/signs-you-are-underpaid-2016-10)...
and you think they know it, too ... they may be looking
elsewhere. Feeling like you might be underpaid can be one of the most
disheartening aspects of work.

## They tell you about major changes on the home front

If there's a major disruption in their family life, this may lead to
them looking for new opportunities for a host of reasons (to be closer
to home, for example, or to work in a less stressful environment), Kerr
explains.

## Their productivity drops

If an employee who is normally extremely productive and punctual
suddenly starts turning reports in late, or their sales have
fallen dramatically, something might be going on. "Any behavioral
changes that point to 'presenteeism' — the phenomenon of employees
showing up at work without being fully present — are huge red flags,"
says Kerr.

## They approach conflict differently

When people are ready to bolt, they may change how they handle
disagreements, Taylor explains. "If they tended to push back before,
they may no longer do so because they don't feel it's worth the bother.
They have emotionally checked out."

However, someone who was generally agreeable before may become more
argumentative out of frustration or resentment, she says.

## They're uncomfortable discussing long-term projects and deadlines

If your employees are seeking greener pastures, they will become visibly
uncomfortable discussing projects that are several months out, says
Taylor. "When longer-term deadlines involve them directly, they'll
attempt to be noncommittal or vague."

## Colleagues tell you they think something's going on

If your coworkers approach you with concerns that something's changed or
"something's going on" with a specific employee, they may be on to
something.

"Other colleagues closer to the action may read the signs well before
you do, so if they bring concerns forward, pay attention," says Kerr.

## They stay under the communications radar

"If one of your team members is contemplating resignation, they're less
likely to communicate often — by email, in person, or in general," says
Taylor. "The thinking is that, to the extent they're less accessible,
they won't risk being put on the spot ... answering sensitive questions
that could jeopardize their job when they're not yet ready to move."

## Their schedule suddenly changes

When they start keeping unusual hours — working later, arriving late,
shifting their hours in any noticeable way — it could be because they
are searching for work or interviewing with other employers while still
trying to balance their current workload, says Kerr.

## You inquire about possible issues, but get little feedback

Do they seem closed off? Are they not willing to work through issues
with you?

"If one of your team members or several of them already have one foot
out the door, they'll act as if nothing is wrong when you address any
issues," says Taylor. This may be because they have already shut
down and mentally moved on.

## You have a bad gut feeling

If you feel awkward moments in your office more often or a
discomfort around your team you can't explain, this may be a
sign they're about to quit. "Your instincts count for a lot and most
people don't put enough stock in them; instead, they second-guess
themselves."

Trust your gut. There's a good chance it's right.

References

  - [Business Insider - signs your best employees are going to
    quit](https://www.businessinsider.com/signs-your-best-employees-are-going-to-quit-2016-10)

