###### [Home](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/blob/master/README.md) | [Leadership](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/tree/master/Leadership/README.md) |
------------


# Information Technology : Team Morale

## “Good Job” Goes a Long Way

Busy days turn into busy weeks, which turn into busy months and
years—which means we often forget to stop and celebrate small
successes. But taking a moment to recognize your team members for a job
well done in their day-to-day work is the easiest, cheapest, and most
effective way to boost morale.

That said, it’s important to recognize people the right way—you
shouldn’t just hand out meaningless compliments. Take notice when
someone has improved or gone above and beyond, and tell her that you
were genuinely impressed with the particularly good work she did.

Also make sure to find opportunities to highlight the individual
contributions of your team members in front of others. Giving
recognition in front of higher-ups, clients, or at staff meetings can go
a long way to making team members feel valued.

## Set (Fun) Team Goals

Setting team goals is the backbone of every good management strategy.
But while project goals, yearly performance metrics, and department-wide
deliverables are all great motivators, they can also be hard to relate
to on a daily basis.

So, work with your team to determine some immediate goals. They can be
work-related, or they can even be goofy things like reaching a team
bagel consumption goal or competing to find the weirdest daily news
story. Giving the team something to work toward in the short-term (and
rewarding them with prizes) is a great way build excitement.

## Confront Frustrations Head On

Even with well-deserved compliments and concrete goals to work toward,
it’s completely normal for your team members to experience moments of
low team morale. But instead of waiting for these periods to naturally
pass, use moments of frustration to seek feedback and look for
solutions. Proactively find out from your team members why they’re
feeling down and what you could do to better manage them. These
conversations can be awkward at first, but they’re also a great way to
get honest and helpful feedback.

To break the ice, try sharing a personal story about a time you were
feeling frustrated with your workload or with a past manager. Also
emphasize to each employee that you’re seeking her help in boosting team
morale, and encourage her to make suggestions on how to improve the team
dynamic.

## Don’t Disrupt Schedules

Office morale often suffers if team members are feeling like they can’t
meet their personal, social, or family obligations outside of work. As a
manager, you should set up your team for professional success—but also
help team members achieve goals in their personal lives.

An easy way to do this is to talk regularly with your team about their
preferred weekly schedules. Find out which employees have standing
appointments—book club on Wednesday evenings, yoga at 6pm on Tuesdays,
breakfast with a mentor on Mondays — and make it priority to accommodate
those schedules. No, you won’t be able to work around everyone all the
time, but if you’re helping your team members maintain a happy life
outside of work, they’ll bring a better attitude to the office.

## Learn From Each Other

When managing a group of people, it’s crucial to remind your team that
it’s made up of individuals who bring diverse skills to the group. This,
of course, applies to workplace skills—Excel, PowerPoint,  [public
speaking](https://www.themuse.com/advice/your-stepbystep-guide-to-become-a-better-public-speaker-fast/)—but
don’t forget about the perhaps underutilized creative talents of your
employees.

Every few weeks, try hosting a rotating “skillshare” (you can base it on
the  [Skillshare](http://www.skillshare.com/about) model of learning
anything from anyone) where a team member presents an untapped skill to
the entire group. You never know—you might have a secret wine
connoisseur, art history buff, or mini golf champ among you\!
Encouraging people to share their talents and interests will not only
give them a chance to work on something they’re really excited about,
it’ll also help the group to unwind together.

## Go For Random Acts of Kindness

When new hires join the team, ask them to fill out a short questionnaire
about their “favorites” (favorite candy, favorite flower, favorite
magazine, favorite sports team). Keep this information on file, and use
it when people could use an extra pick-me-up.

When someone’s been working late all week, surprise him with his
favorite candy on Friday. Or, on someone’s birthday, get her a bouquet
of her favorite flowers. Everyone appreciates random acts of kindness,
but these gestures are more meaningful if you’ve put time into
investigating and remembering gifts that they’ll actually enjoy.

## Lead By Example

It’s impossible to be cheery 100% of the time, but  [stress and
negativity](https://www.themuse.com/advice/4-ways-to-stay-sane-in-a-toxic-office/) are
incredibly infectious. If your team is headed into a busy season or
tough project, it’s important to come to work with a good attitude every
day and to be diligent about minimizing your complaints in front of team
members.

Remember, others will look to you to understand how to approach what’s
going on in the organization and visualize the big picture perspective,
and your outlook can set the tone for your entire team’s attitude.

## Go for Regular Feedback Sessions

For a positive improvement in the working environment, it is always
important to have a certain degree of openness with your employees.
Considering the feedback of your employees helps you tackle and solve
the multiple problems of your company. In order to boost the morale of
your remote team members, it is important to brainstorm different ways
of holding regular feedback sessions with your  [remote
employee](https://www.virtualemployee.com/?source=post_page---------------------------).

## Go for Visual Communication and Interaction

If you’ve only been making use of emails, it is important to understand
that this will be a drag on the productivity of your employees. As
emails demand high levels of reactivity, they are also known to increase
stress among employees. Visual communication and interaction, on the
other hand, helps you have both casual as well as formal communication
with your employees. This, in turn, helps foster a strong bond between
you and your team. A healthy and interactive working relationship
definitely fast-tracks workflow at the end of the day.

## Recognize Individual Milestones and Failures

It is a universally accepted fact that employees' morale gets a boost
when employers appreciate them as people first and then as employees.
You can choose to recognize personal milestones while appreciating
privacy. It is always advisable to respond with immense consideration
and kindness. By being a supportive employer, you can always boost the
productivity of your employees.

## Increase Job Satisfaction of Employees

By adopting a few strategies, you can nurture a positive relationship
with your employees. Paying for transportation, gym membership, child
crèche etc. definitely helps boost employee morale and increases the
job satisfaction of employees. Again, for instance, if your company has
a partnership with other organizations, it will be a smart decision to
ask them for mutual discounts on the services that they offer to your
employees.

## Provide Substantial Bonuses

Giving unexpected and unconditional gifts to employees leads to an
increase in their productivity. Substantial bonuses always have a
positive impact on a workforce. Imagine the positive impact it would
have on a single working mother supporting a family or a fresher who is
struggling to pay off their education loan. Unconditional gifts can
definitely boost the morale of remote workers and increase their
productivity.

## Lunch and Learn

Lunch and learns encourage employees to share their thoughts and ideas
in a more relaxed, casual environment at lunchtime. They aim to enhance
the skills, knowledge, thinking, and learning abilities of employees.
They are provided in an informal setting that employees appreciate,
learning something new and interesting.

Lunch and learns are also an opportunity to build teamwork and a
positive work culture or environment for employees. Their purpose is to:

  - Enhance employee learning about topics that are ancillary to work
    topics
  - Develop employee knowledge about life skills, the world, and other
    topics of interest
  - Provide a reason for employees to gather to **enhance teamwork** and
    company values
  - Raise employees' level of engagement and motivation at work by
    providing onsite education
  - Increase employees' ability to grow as well as contribute to their
    company's success

References

  - [7 Great Ways to Boost Your Team's
    Morale](https://www.themuse.com/advice/7-great-ways-to-boost-your-teams-morale)
  - [5 Effective Ways to Boost the Morale of Your Remote
    Team](https://medium.com/@VeRobin1/5-effective-ways-to-boost-the-morale-of-your-remote-team-9281528d40a4)
  - [The balance careers  - 
    brown-bag-lunches](https://www.thebalancecareers.com/brown-bag-lunches-1918689)



