###### [Home](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/blob/master/README.md) | [Leadership](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/tree/master/Leadership/README.md) |
------------

# Leadership : Toxic Staff and Effects

## Employee

### The “get-by” employee

Let’s define what a “get-by” employee is first. They are someone who
barely makes deadlines. The person who always uses their 5-minute grace
period, and who always volunteers for the part of the project that
doesn’t require much effort. An employee like this is just getting by.
They’re skating through their career — doing just enough to keep their
job.

A team that has a get-by member is frustrated because that employee
doesn’t pull their weight. While everyone else is working hard, they are
smooth sailing. No one hires a person to do the bare minimum. So why
would you keep a team member that does the bare minimum? Let this
employee go.

### The “toxic” person

Toxic 
[employees](https://fairygodboss.com/career-topics/toxic-employee) fly
under the radar with management. They have a Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde 
[personality](https://fairygodboss.com/articles/18-free-personality-tests-that-are-actually-fun),
but the manager can’t see it. All they see is someone who is a great
team member, who works hard and who always raises their hand for
something. But when their manager is gone, this person flips. If you
notice you have a team member who always rotates in and out of certain
circles in the office, whose work-friends are ever-changing or who goes
through periods by themselves, they may be a toxic employee.

Toxic employees affect new hires more than anything. New hires barely
have opinions on the company, department and team; the toxic employee
shapes this opinion. Let them go before they can.

### The fake success story

A fake 
[successful](https://fairygodboss.com/articles/how-to-be-successful) employee
is someone who gets lucky at work. They answered the phone at the right
time. They approached the right customer. They got the “good” part of
the project. It’s someone who doesn’t have to work hard to make it seem
as if they are working hard. Make sense?

So, why would you fire this person if they are successful? Great
question\! Because they do not know how to do the job. Things have
fallen into their lap because of their luck. They answered the phone and
landed a major deal, and 
[leadership](https://fairygodboss.com/articles/definition-of-leadership) now
believes they have the skills to go out and get more business or
clients. They are assigned to train new hires because they are seen as
successful when they don’t have a story to tell. And most importantly,
they do not know how to handle 
[failure](https://fairygodboss.com/articles/i-feel-like-a-failure).

When the fake successful person gets their first significant challenge
or loss, they do not know how to handle it. And usually, they do not
make it much longer. They’ve been riding a high for so long, that they
don’t know how to handle the downward slopes. Let them go before this
happens.

### The one they’re best friends with

This final type might come as a shock, but a manager’s best relationship
is usually not the hardest working person. And if they are, it may be
because they fall into one of the categories above. For instance, the
get-by employee loves to be close to management. If they are close to
their manager, they can get first pick at projects and appear to [ have
it all](http://fairygodboss.com/career-topics/having-it-all) together.
The toxic employee will have the biggest smile in the room, the best
ideas and will want to lead the team in assignments. It’s a way to stay
in control. And the fake successful person?

The hardest people to fire are top producers and employees. But if you
are a manager, this the person you should pay the most attention to.
Their peers will naturally want to be next to them and learn from them,
so make sure they can set a good example and help actually train and 
[mentor](https://fairygodboss.com/articles/what-is-a-mentor) others.

Being a manager is tough, but you wouldn’t be in the job if you couldn’t
handle it. Lean on your team members to support. They see things way
before you do. You would be surprised how much happens right under your
nose.

## Management

Traditionally, organisational researchers have primarily been focused on
identifying the qualities and traits of individuals that characterise
effective leadership. However, there is an increasing consensus among
scholars and practitioners that, to understand why leadership can
sometimes result in destructive outcomes, we must focus on understanding
the qualities and traits of individuals that characterise dysfunctional
leadership styles.

Previous research has suggested that dark personality traits, such as
narcissism, Machiavellianism or psychopathy –the Dark Triad –may be one
such cause for dysfunctional leadership. As part of a research team at
Alliance Manchester Business School, we explored the implications for
employees and organisations across two of these traits – leader
psychopathy and leader narcissism. Psychopathy encompasses traits
relating to callousness, manipulativeness, impulsivity, and poor
behavioural control, while narcissism is typified primarily by feelings
of entitlement, grandiosity, self-love and a need for admiration.

Across our three studies, drawing on an international sample of more
than 1,200 employees from a variety of different industries and
organisations, we found that, as the levels of psychopathy and
narcissism increased among leaders, so too did the prevalence of
workplace bullying, counterproductive work behaviour, job
dissatisfaction, psychological distress and depression among subordinate
employees.

What was perhaps most interesting about our findings was that workplace
bullying emerged as a mediating mechanism, through which leader
psychopathy and narcissism seemed to affect employee job satisfaction,
wellbeing, depression, and counterproductive work behaviour.

We know that bosses high in psychopathy and narcissism have a strong
desire for power and often lack empathy. This can result in these
individuals taking advantage of others, taking credit for their work,
being overly critical, and generally behaving aggressively in order to
achieve their desired outcome.

We also know, from previous research, that these individuals have
reputations for being bullies, and are likely to engage in bullying
behaviours more frequently than individuals low in psychopathy or
narcissism. However, our results suggest that in addition to the
negative consequences for their psychological wellbeing and job
satisfaction, employees who find themselves in such a working
environment are more likely to retaliate by redirecting their resulting
frustration at either the organisation (resulting in more
counterproductive work behaviours) or their fellow employees (resulting
in an increase in employee-employee bullying as well as leader-employee
bullying).

Our research highlights the need for organisations to consider the
darker side of personality, particularly when selecting individuals for
leadership positions. But, if organisations are able to implement
effective interventions targeted at managing workplace bullying, then at
least some of the destructive consequences of psychopathic and
narcissistic leaders might be diminished.

References

  - [The ladders - The 4 types of employees that managers should fire
    immediately](https://www.theladders.com/career-advice/the-4-types-of-employees-that-managers-should-fire-immediately)
  - [University of Manchester - toxic bosses how destructive personality
    traits can infect a
    workforce](https://www.alliancembs.manchester.ac.uk/news/toxic-bosses--how-destructive-personality-traits-can-infect-a-workforce/)


