###### [Home](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/blob/master/README.md) | [Quality Assurance (QA)](https://github.com/RyKaj/Documentation/tree/master/QA/README.md) |
------------


# Quality Assurance (QA) : Role of Tester in DevOps

In order to build, test, and release software faster and more reliably.
DevOps introduce some set of practice that automates the processes
between software development and IT teams.

DevOps aimed not only to improve the process of feature releases but
also to reduce defects, so that products can gain high level of quality.
DevOps reduce the process cost related with delivering working product
in incremental approach. DevOps dealing with small, rapid, iterative
development.

The changes that each release having clarity, consistency and
collaboration to understand each other. Changes also been affected in
production environment and customer environment. QA team design details
test plan based on those changes. Operation and development team need to
come on same umbrella. This time specified methodology and tools play a
vital role. Each team following their own designed methodology that best
suit with their skill and process. But goals are common. That is quality
products in a very short time.

<kbd>![](https://miro.medium.com/max/3483/1*BZUIwLExSu3slCz5mu_ETw.png)</kbd>

Testers and developers both play important roles in DevOps.

Normally test Process are based on some steps that following all test
levels until product ready for final deployment. Consider those
activities that describe below.

  a. QA team gets build after it successfully deployed. Here planed
    test environment is the key factor that influence test.
  b. Then QA team perform test execution based on pre planed test case
    or without defined test cases.
  c. Test execution may be Manual or Automated.
  d. Functional and Regression testing are main concern.
  After QA team meets exit criteria then they stopped testing. Then
    this build finally goes into the production server.

Now think about **DevOps**. In DevOps, test scenario is different from
traditional test process. As quickly as possible QA transfer fresh
development code into the production environment with the collaboration
of the DevOps teams. DevOps engineer then provide the necessary support
on tools and infrastructure to make it a process that works perfectly,
making sure all changes function behaved as expected.

QA team should be focused about quality in software development
life-cycle. Testers be part of technical teams. Testers have to consider
manual functional and non-functional testing, and should focus on their
skills and experiences for apply test automation, and define test
strategies.

Testers always think about requirements that must be meet. Testers be
focused on every change and their effect on developing products. In
order to do this, requirements analysis done by testers. Testers find
out test scope. After successfully analysis, quality attributes be
well-introduce. Some quality characteristic be pre-defined by
organizations or by customers. Requirements need to be specific. QA
teams should involve in the requirements process to help and guide
development teams. QA teams need to start thinking about how they can
utilize their skills to add value as more of their day-to-day work is
automated.

Risk based testing also have large benefits. Testers have to do
regression testing when major changes that may affect other functions as
well. In this scenario automate regression test play very important role
by maximum test coverage.

QA teams should play positive attitude and try most effective
communication way with teams so their technique can add the value by all
possible way in the software development life cycle.

As a tester, the following core tasks need to be maintained through the
life cycle.

  - Engineers and QA activities should be one lined based on standard
    that expected.
  - Try to automate test cases.
  - All deployment must be automated.
  - Test cases that are automated should be perfectly aligned with the
    Continuous Integration cycle.
  - Proper utilization of test automation tools and Continuous
    Integration tools.

From a logistical perspective, Ernest Mueller, lean systems manager for
AlienVault and organizer of DevOps Days Austin says, there are three
likely ways to see QA roles reassigned to better fit DevOps
organizations.

First, there’s the opportunity to embed QA expertise directly within
product teams to directly support them. This is an area that has been
most effective in dealing with QA transition so far, says Steve
Anderson, CEO of the DevOps and agile consultancy Clutch. “The most
successful ways I’ve seen where you still get a hybrid going on is where
a QA is directly embedded into the sprint team or the scrum team, where
they’re involved from the get-go,” he says. “They get the user’s story.
They’re writing test cases.”

Second, Mueller says, there’s also the potential for diverting QA pros
into tooling groups responsible for writing the test harness or
providing tooling across the organization.

And third, there’s the opportunity for creating a center of excellence
or consulting group meant to advise specific work groups on strategic
issues of quality. “That can be tricky, because having the separate
consulting group can easily turn into doing it the way you used to
work,” he explains. “It’s a very subtle approach change that you have
to make. It’s not like they’re not doing work for you. They’re providing
expert consulting so you can do the work better.”

The speed of automation should have QA working within a totally
different paradigm, says Wayne Ariola, chief strategy officer for
Parasoft, a testing and service virtualization firm. “Today we’re mostly
in causal observation mode: Build the test, experience the defect,
collect the defect — it’s causal. Something happened, we collected it,”
he says. “We need to move to a more probabilistic mode.

“This means getting to know the internal application much more as
testers than we do today,” he says. “This also means we have to
understand the dependencies associated with the operational testing.”

The truth is that there is still plenty of room for testing
professionals in the era of DevOps. They just need to adapt to a
rewritten organizational hierarchy — and a completely different mindset
about testing objectives.

For maintain higher accuracy on quality, it is necessary to automate all
testing processes by accurately configuring for auto deployment. QA team
should Keep in their mind that all process should be done without any
failure.

Concentrating on the customer needs, tester give focus on validating
product in short time and gaining high level of quality. A good tester
should not mess with time and quality when more builds are on pipeline.

References

  - [Medium - Role of testers in devops](https://medium.com/oceanize-geeks/role-of-testers-in-devops-56e790792cd7)


